Project Gutenberg's Histology of the Blood, by Paul Ehrlich and Adolf Lazarus

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Histology of the Blood
       Normal and Pathological

Author: Paul Ehrlich
        Adolf Lazarus

Commentator: German Sims Woodhead

Translator: W. Myers

Release Date: August 29, 2009 [EBook #29842]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTOLOGY OF THE BLOOD ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, Josephine Paolucci and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)






HISTOLOGY OF THE BLOOD

NORMAL AND PATHOLOGICAL.


London: C. J. CLAY AND SONS,
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,
AVE MARIA LANE,

AND

H. K. LEWIS,
136, GOWER STREET, W.C.

Glasgow: 50, WELLINGTON STREET.
Leipzig: F. A. BROCKHAUS.
New York: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.
Bombay: E. SEYMOUR HALE.

Transcriber's note:

For Text: Words surrounded by a cedilla such as ~this~ signifies that
the words are bolded in the text. Words surrounded by underscores like
_this_ signifies the words are in italics in the text. Words surrounded
by equal signs (=like this=) means the letters in the words are spaced
out (gesperrt). For numbers and equations, carats before bracketed
numbers denote a superscript.

Minor typos have been corrected.


HISTOLOGY OF THE BLOOD

NORMAL AND PATHOLOGICAL

BY

P. EHRLICH AND A. LAZARUS.


EDITED AND TRANSLATED

BY

W. MYERS, M.A., M.B., B.Sc.

JOHN LUCAS WALKER STUDENT OF PATHOLOGY.


WITH A PREFACE

BY

G. SIMS WOODHEAD, M.D.

PROFESSOR OF PATHOLOGY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.

CAMBRIDGE:
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.
1900

[_All Rights reserved._]

Cambridge:
PRINTED BY J. AND C. F. CLAY,
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.




PREFACE.


In no department of Pathology has advance been so fitful and interrupted
as in that dealing with blood changes in various forms of disease,
though none now offers a field that promises such an abundant return for
an equal expenditure of time and labour.

Observations of great importance were early made by Wharton Jones,
Waller, and Hughes Bennett in this country, and by Virchow and Max
Schultze in Germany. Not, however, until the decade ending in 1890 was
it realised what a large amount of new work on the corpuscular elements
of the blood had been done by Hayem, and by Ehrlich and his pupils. As
successive papers were published, especially from German laboratories,
it became evident that the systematic study of the blood by various new
methods was resulting in the acquisition of a large number of facts
bearing on the pathology of the blood; though it was still difficult to
localise many of the normal hæmatogenetic processes. The production of
the various cells under pathological conditions, where so many new
factors are introduced, must necessarily be enshrouded in even greater
obscurity and could only be accurately determined by patient
investigation, a careful arrangement and study of facts, and cautious
deduction from accumulated and classified observations.

The pathology of the blood, especially of the corpuscular elements,
though one of the most interesting, is certainly one of the most
confusing, of all departments of pathology, and to those who have not
given almost undivided attention to this subject it is extremely
difficult to obtain a comprehensive and accurate view of the blood in
disease. It is for this reason that we welcome the present work in its
English garb. Professor Ehrlich by his careful and extended observations
on the blood has qualified himself to give a bird's-eye view of the
subject, such as few if any are capable of offering; and his book now so
well translated by Mr. Myers must remain one of the classical works on
blood in disease and on blood diseases, and in introducing it to English
readers Mr. Myers makes an important contribution to the accurate study
of hæmal pathology in this country.

Comparatively few amongst us are able to make a cytological examination
of the blood, whilst fewer still are competent to interpret the results
of such an examination. How many of our physicians are in a position to
distinguish between a myelogenic leukocythæmia and a lymphatic leukæmia?
How many of us could draw correct inferences from the fact that in
typhoid fever there may not only be no increase in the number of certain
of the white cells of the blood, but an actual leukopenia? How many
appreciated the diagnostic value of the difference in the cellular
elements in the blood in cases of scarlet fever and of measles, and how
many have anything more than a general idea as to the significance of a
hypoleucocytosis or a hyperleucocytosis in a case of acute pneumonia, or
as to the relations of cells of different forms and the percentage
quantity of hæmoglobin found in the various types of anæmia?

One of the most important points indicated in the following pages is
that the cellular elements of the blood must be studied as a whole and
not as isolated factors, as "it has always been shown that the character
of a leukæmic condition is only settled by a concurrence of a large
number of single symptoms of which each one is indispensable for the
diagnosis, and which taken together are absolutely conclusive."
Conditions of experiment can of course be carefully determined, so far,
at any rate, as the introduction of substances from outside is
concerned, but we must always bear in mind that it is impossible, except
in very special cases of disease, to separate the action of the
bone-marrow from the action of the lymphatic glands; still, by careful
observation and in special cases, especially when the various organs and
parts may be examined after death, information may be gained even on
this point. By means of experiment the production of leucocytosis by
peptones, the action of micro-organisms on the bone-marrow, the
influence of the products of decaying or degenerating epithelial or
endothelioid cells, may all be studied in a more or less perfect form;
but, withal, it is only by a study of the numerous conditions under
which alterations in the cellular elements take place in the blood that
any accurate information can be obtained.

Hence for further knowledge of the "structure" and certain functions of
the blood we must to a great extent rely upon clinical observation.

Some of the simpler problems have already been flooded with light by
those who following in Ehrlich's footsteps have studied the blood in
disease. But many of even greater importance might be cited from the
work before us. With the abundant information, the well argued
deductions and the carefully drawn up statement here placed before us it
may be claimed that we are now in a position to make diagnoses that not
long ago were quite beyond our reach, whilst a thorough training of our
younger medical men in the methods of blood examination must result in
the accumulation of new facts of prime importance both to the
pathologist and to the physician.

Both teacher and investigator cannot but feel that they have now at
command not only accurate results obtained by careful observation, but
the foundation on which the superstructure has been built up--exquisite
but simple methods of research. Ehrlich's methods may be (and have
already been) somewhat modified as occasion requires, but the principles
of fixation and staining here set forth must for long remain the methods
to be utilised in future work. His differential staining, in which he
utilised the special affinities that certain cells and parts of cells
have for basic, acid and neutral stains, was simply a foreshadowing of
his work on the affinity that certain cells and tissues have for
specific drugs and toxins; the study of these special elective
affinities now forms a very wide field of investigation in which
numerous workers are already engaged in determining the position and
nature of these seats of election for special proteid and other poisons.

The researches of Metschnikoff, of Kanthack and Hardy, of Muir, of
Buchanan, and others, are supplementary and complementary to those
carried on in the German School, but we may safely say that this work
must be looked upon as influencing the study of blood more than any that
has yet been published. It is only after a careful study of this book
that any idea of the enormous amount of work that has been contributed
to hæmatology by Ehrlich and his pupils, and the relatively important
part that such a work must play in guiding and encouraging those who are
interested in this fascinating subject, can be formed.

The translation appears to have been very carefully made, and the
opportunity has been seized to add notes on certain points that have a
special bearing on Ehrlich's work, or that have been brought into
prominence since the time that the original work was produced. This
renders the English edition in certain respects superior even to the
original.

                                                 G. SIMS WOODHEAD.




NOTE BY THE TRANSLATOR.


This translation of the first part of _Die Anæmie, Nothnagel's Specielle
Pathologie und Therapie_, vol. VIII. was carried out under the personal
guidance of Professor Ehrlich. Several alterations and additions have
been made in the present edition. To my friend Dr Cobbett I owe a debt
of gratitude for his kind help in the revision of the proof-sheets.

                                                            W. M.




CONTENTS.


                                                          PAGE


INTRODUCTION                                                 1

DEFINITION. CLINICAL METHODS OF INVESTIGATION OF THE BLOOD   1

  The quantity of the blood                                  2
  Number of red corpuscles                                   4
  Size of red corpuscles                                    12
  Amount of hæmoglobin in the blood                         13
  Specific gravity of the blood                             17
  Hygrometry                                                21
  Total volume of the red corpuscles                        21
  Alkalinity of the blood                                   23
  Coagulability of the blood                                24
  Separation of the serum                                   24
  Resistance of the red corpuscles                          25


THE MORPHOLOGY OF THE BLOOD                                 27


A. METHODS OF INVESTIGATION                                 29

  [alpha]. Preparation of the dry specimen                  32
  [beta]. Fixation of the dry specimen                      34
  [gamma]. Staining of the dry specimen                     36
    Theory of staining                                      37
    Combined staining                                       38
    Triacid fluid                                           40
    Other staining fluids                                   41
    Recognition of glycogen in the blood                    45
    Microscopic determination of the distribution of the
     alkali of the blood                                    46


B. NORMAL AND PATHOLOGICAL HISTOLOGY OF THE BLOOD           48

  The red blood corpuscles                                  48
  Diminution of hæmoglobin equivalent                       49
  Anæmic or polychromatophil degeneration                   49
  Poikilocytosis                                            52
  Nucleated red blood corpuscles                            54
  Normoblasts and megaloblasts                              56
  The fate of the nuclei of the erythroblasts               57
  The clinical differences in the erythroblasts             61


THE WHITE BLOOD CORPUSCLES                                  67


I. NORMAL HISTOLOGY AND CLASSIFICATION OF THE
WHITE BLOOD CORPUSCLES                                      71

The lymphocytes                                             71
The large mononuclear leucocytes                            73
The transitional forms                                      74
The polynuclear leucocytes                                  75
The eosinophil cells                                        76
The mast cells                                              76
Pathological forms of white blood corpuscles                77
  The neutrophil myelocytes                                 77
  The eosinophil myelocytes                                 78
  The neutrophil pseudolymphocytes                          78
Stimulation forms                                           79


II. ON THE PLACES OF ORIGIN OF THE WHITE BLOOD CORPUSCLES   81

[alpha]. The spleen                                         84
[beta]. The lymphatic glands                               100
[gamma]. The bone-marrow                                   105


III. ON THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE CELL-GRANULES,
AND THEIR SIGNIFICANCE                                     121

History of the investigation of the granules               121
  Since Ehrlich.                                           123
Methods of demonstration                                   124
Vital staining of granules                                 124
The Bioblast theory (Altmann)                              128
The granules as metabolic products of the cells (Ehrlich)  130
Secretory processes in granulated cells                    134


IV. LEUCOCYTOSIS                                           138

Biological importance of leucocytosis                      138
Morphology of leucocytosis                                 142
[alpha]. 1. Polynuclear neutrophil leucocytosis            143
  Definition                                               143
  Clinical occurrence                                      144
  Origin                                                   144
[alpha]. 2. Polynuclear eosinophil leucocytosis,
  including the mast cells                                 148
  Definition                                               149
  Clinical occurrence                                      150
  Origin                                                   154
[beta]. Leukæmia ("mixed leucocytosis")                    167
  Lymphatic leukæmia                                       170
  Myelogenous leukæmia                                     171
    Morphological character                                187
    Origin                                                 187


V. LEUKOPENIA                                              188

The blood platelets. The hæmoconiæ                         190


INDEX TO LITERATURE                                        195


INDEX                                                      209


PLATES




INTRODUCTION.

DEFINITION OF ANÆMIA. CLINICAL METHODS OF INVESTIGATION OF THE BLOOD.


In practical medicine the term "anæmia" has not quite the restricted
sense that scientific investigation gives it. The former regards certain
striking symptoms as characteristic of the anæmic condition; pallor of
the skin, a diminution of the normal redness of the mucous membranes of
the eyes, lips, mouth, and pharynx. From the presence of these phenomena
anæmia is diagnosed, and according to their greater or less intensity,
conclusions are also drawn as to the degree of the poverty of the blood.

It is evident from the first that a definition based on such a frequent
and elementary chain of symptoms will bring into line much that is
unconnected, and will perhaps omit what it should logically include.
Indeed a number of obscurities and contradictions is to be ascribed to
this circumstance.

The first task therefore of a scientific treatment of the anæmic
condition is carefully to define its extent. For this purpose the
symptoms above mentioned are little suited, however great, in their
proper place, their practical importance may be.

Etymologically the word "=anæmia=" signifies a want of the normal
=quantity of blood=. This may be "general" and affect the whole organism;
or "local" and limited to a particular region or a single organ. The
local anæmias we can at once exclude from our consideration.

_À priori_, the amount of blood may be subnormal in two senses,
quantitative and qualitative. We may have a diminution of the amount of
blood--"=Oligæmia=." Deterioration of the quality of the blood may be
quite independent of the amount of blood, and must primarily express
itself in a diminution of the physiologically important constituents.
Hence we distinguish the following chief types of alteration of the
blood; (1) diminution of the amount of Hæmoglobin (=Oligochromæmia=), and
(2) diminution of the number of red blood corpuscles (=Oligocythæmia=).

We regard as anæmic all conditions of the blood where a diminution of
the amount of hæmoglobin can be recognised; in by far the greater number
of cases, if not in all, Oligæmia and Oligocythæmia to a greater or less
extent occur simultaneously.

The most important methods of clinical hæmatology bear directly or
indirectly on the recognition of these conditions.

There is at present no method of ESTIMATION OF THE TOTAL QUANTITY OF THE
BLOOD which can be used clinically. We rely to a certain extent on the
observation of the already mentioned symptoms of redness or pallor of
the skin and mucous membranes. To a large degree these depend upon the
composition of the blood, and not upon the fulness of the peripheral
vessels. If we take the latter as a measure of the total amount of
blood, isolated vessels, visible to the naked eye, _e.g._ those of the
sclerotic, may be observed. Most suitable is the ophthalmoscopic
examination of the width of the vessels at the back of the eye. Ræhlmann
has shewn that in 60% of the cases of chronic anæmia, in which the skin
and mucous membranes are very white, there is hyperæmia of the
retina--which is evidence that in such cases the circulating blood is
pale in colour, but certainly not less in quantity than normally. The
condition of the pulse is an important indication of diminution of the
quantity of the blood, though only when it is marked. It presents a
peculiar smallness and feebleness in all cases of severe oligæmia.

The bleeding from fresh skin punctures gives a further criterion of the
quantity of blood, within certain limits, but is modified by changes in
the coagulability of the blood. Anyone who has made frequent blood
examinations will have observed that in this respect extraordinary
variations occur. In some cases scarcely a drop of blood can be
obtained, while in others the blood flows freely. One will not err in
assuming in the former case a diminution of the quantity of the blood.

The fulness of the peripheral vessels however is a sign of only relative
value, for the amount of blood in the internal organs may be very
different. The problem, how to estimate exactly, if possible
mathematically, the quantity of blood in the body has always been
recognised as important, and its solution would constitute a real
advance. The methods which have so far been proposed for clinical
purposes originate from Tarchanoff. He suggested that one may estimate
the quantity of blood by comparing the numbers of the red blood
corpuscles before and after copious sweating. Apart from various
theoretical considerations this method is far too clumsy for practical
purposes.

Quincke has endeavoured to calculate the amount of blood in cases of
blood transfusion for therapeutic purposes. From the number of red blood
corpuscles of the patient before and after blood transfusion, the amount
of blood transfused and the number of corpuscles it contains, by a
simple mathematical formula the quantity of the blood of the patient can
be estimated. But this method is only practicable in special cases and
is open to several theoretical errors. First, it depends upon the
relative number of red blood corpuscles in the blood; inasmuch as the
transfusion of normal blood into normal blood, for example, would
produce no alteration in the count. This consideration is enough to shew
that this proceeding can only be used in special cases. It has indeed
been found that an increase of the red corpuscles per cubic millimetre
occurs in persons with a very small number of red corpuscles, who have
been injected with normal blood. But it is very hazardous to try to
estimate therefrom the volume of the pre-existing blood, since the act
of transfusion undoubtedly is immediately followed by compensatory
currents and alterations in the distribution of the blood.

No property of the blood has been so exactly and frequently tested as
the NUMBER OF RED CORPUSCLES PER CUBIC MILLIMETRE OF BLOOD. The
convenience of the counting apparatus, and the apparently absolute
measure of the result have ensured for the methods of enumeration an
early clinical application.

At the present time the instruments of Thoma-Zeiss or others similarly
constructed are generally used; and we may assume that the principle on
which they depend and the methods of their use are known. A number of
fluids are used to dilute the blood, which on the whole fulfil the
requirements of preserving the form and colour of the red corpuscles, of
preventing their fusing together, and of allowing them to settle
rapidly. Of the better known solutions we will here mention =Pacini's= and
=Hayem's= fluids.

     Pacini's solution.  Hydrarg. bichlor.    2.0
                         Natr. chlor.         4.0
                         Glycerin            26.0
                         Aquæ destillat.    226.0

     Hayem's solution.   Hydrarg. bichlor.    0.5
                         Natr. sulph.         5.0
                         Natr. chlor.         1.0
                         Aquæ destillat.    200.0

     For counting the white blood corpuscles the same instrument is
     generally used, but the blood is diluted 10 times instead of
     100 times. It is advantageous to use a diluting fluid which
     destroys the red blood corpuscles, but which brings out the
     nuclei of the white corpuscles, so that the latter are more
     easily recognised. For this purpose the solution recommended by
     Thoma is the best--namely a half per cent. solution of acetic
     acid, to which a trace of methyl violet has been added[1].

The results of these methods of enumeration are sufficiently exact, as
they have, according to the frequently confirmed observations of R.
Thoma and I. F. Lyon, only a small error. In a count of 200 cells it is
five per cent., of 1250 two per cent., of 5000 one, and of 20,000
one-half per cent.

There are certain factors in the practical application of these methods,
which in other directions influence the result unfavourably.

It has been found by Cohnstein and Zuntz and others that the blood in
the large vessels has a constant composition, but that in the small
vessels and capillaries the formed elements may vary considerably in
number, though the blood is in other respects normal. Thus, for example,
in a one-sided paralytic, the capillary blood is different on the two
sides; and congestion, cold, and so forth raise the number of red blood
corpuscles. Hence, for purposes of enumeration, the rule is to take
blood only from those parts of the body which are free from accidental
variation; to avoid all influences such as energetic rubbing or
scrubbing, etc., which alter the circulation in the capillaries; to
undertake the examination at such times when the number of red blood
corpuscles is not influenced by the taking of food or medicine.

It is usual to take the blood from the tip of the finger, and only in
exceptional cases, _e.g._ in oedema of the finger, are other places
chosen, such as the lobule of the ear, or (in the case of children) the
big toe. For the puncture pointed needles or specially constructed
instruments, open or shielded lancets, are unnecessary: we recommend a
fine steel pen, of which one nib has been broken off. It is easily
disinfected by heating to redness, and produces not a puncture but what
is more useful, a cut, from which blood freely flows without any great
pressure.

The literature dealing with the numbers of the red corpuscles in health,
is so large as to be quite unsurveyable. According to the new and
complete compilation of Reinert and v. Limbeck, the following figures
(calculated roundly for mm.^{3}) may be taken as physiological:

                   _Men._

     Maximum      Minimum      Average
     7,000,000   4,000,000     5,000,000

                   _Women._

     Maximum      Minimum     Average
     5,250,000   4,500,000    4,500,000

This difference between the sexes first makes its appearance at the time
of puberty of the female. Up to the commencement of menstruation the
number of corpuscles in the female is in fact slightly higher than in
the male (Stierlin). Apart from this, the time of life seems to cause a
difference in the number of red corpuscles only in so far that in the
newly-born, polycythæmia (up to 8-1/2 millions during the first days of
life) is observed (E. Schiff). After the first occasion on which food is
taken a decrease can be observed, and gradually (though by stages) the
normal figure is reached in from 10-14 days. On the other hand the
oligocythæmia here and there observed in old age, according to Schmaltz,
is not constant, and therefore cannot be regarded as a peculiarity of
senility, but must be caused by subsidiary processes of various kinds
which come into play at this stage of life.

The influence which the taking of food exercises on the number of the
red blood corpuscles is to be ascribed to the taking in of water, and is
so insignificant, that the variations, in part at least, fall within the
errors of the methods of enumeration.

Other physiological factors: =menstruation= (that is, the single
occurrence), =pregnancy=, =lactation=, do not alter the number of blood
corpuscles to any appreciable extent. The numbers do not differ in
arterial and venous blood.

All these physiological variations in the number of the blood
corpuscles, are dependent, according to Cohnstein and Zuntz, on
vasomotor influences. Stimuli, which narrow the peripheral vessels,
locally diminish the number of red blood corpuscles; excitation of the
vasodilators brings about the opposite effect. Hence it follows, that
the normal variations of the number contained in a unit of space are
merely the expressions of an altered distribution of the red elements
within the circulation, and are quite independent of the reproduction
and decay of the cells.

=Climatic conditions= apparently exercise a great influence over the
number of corpuscles. This fact is important for physiology, pathology,
and therapeutics, and has come to the front especially in the last few
years, since Viault's researches in the heights of the Corderillas. As
his researches, as well as those of Mercier, Egger, Wolff, Koeppe, v.
Jaruntowski and Schroeder, Miescher, Kündig and others, shew, the
number of red blood corpuscles in a healthy man, with the normal average
of 5,000,000 per mm.^{3}, begins to rise immediately after reaching a
height considerably above the sea-level. With a rise proceeding by
stages, a new average figure is reached in 10 to 14 days, considerably
larger than the old one, and indeed the greater the difference in level
between the former and the latter places, the greater is the difference
in this figure. Healthy persons born and bred at these heights have an
average of red corpuscles which is considerably above the mean; and
which indeed as a rule is somewhat greater than in those who are
acclimatised or only temporarily living at these elevations.

The following small table gives an idea of the degree to which the
number of blood corpuscles may vary at higher altitudes from the average
of five millions.

-------------------+---------------+-------------------+-------------
Author             |   Locality    | Height above sea- |  Increase of
                   |               |       level       |
-------------------+---------------+-------------------+-------------
v. Jaruntowski     |  Görbersdorf  |    561 metres     |     800,000
Wolff and Koeppe   |  Reiboldsgrün |    700   "        |   1,000,000
Egger              |  Arosa        |   1800   "        |   2,000,000
Viault             |  Corderillas  |   4392   "        |   3,000,000
-------------------+---------------+-------------------+-------------

Exactly the opposite process is to be observed when a person accustomed
to a high altitude reaches a lower one. Under these conditions the
correspondingly lower physiological average is produced. These
interesting processes have given rise to various interpretations and
hypotheses. On the one hand, the diminished oxygen tension in the upper
air was regarded as the immediate cause of the increase of red blood
corpuscles. Miescher, particularly, has described the want of oxygen as
a specific stimulus to the production of erythrocytes. Apart from the
physiological improbability of such a rapid and comprehensive fresh
production, one must further dissent from this interpretation, since the
histological appearance of the blood gives it no support. Koeppe, who
has specially directed part of his researches to the morphological
phenomena produced during acclimatisation to high altitudes, has shewn,
that in the increase of the number of red corpuscles two mutually
independent and distinct processes are to be distinguished. He observed
that, although the number of red corpuscles was raised so soon as a few
hours after arrival at Reiboldsgrün, numerous poikilocytes and
microcytes make their appearance at the same time. The initial increase
is therefore to be explained by budding and division of the red
corpuscles already present in the circulating blood. Koeppe sees in
this process, borrowing Ehrlich's conception of poikilocytosis, a
physiological adaptation to the lower atmospheric pressure, and the
resulting greater difficulty of oxygen absorption. The impediment to the
function of the hæmoglobin is to a certain extent compensated, since the
stock of hæmoglobin possesses a larger surface, and so is capable of
increased respiration. So also the remarkable fact may be readily
understood that the sudden rise of the number of corpuscles is not at
first accompanied by a rise of the quantity of hæmoglobin, or of the
total volume of the red blood corpuscles. These values are first
increased when the second process, an increased fresh production of
normal red discs, takes place, which naturally requires for its
developement a longer time. The poikilocytes and microcytes then vanish,
according to the extent of the reproduction; and finally a blood is
formed, which is characterised by an increased number of red corpuscles,
and a corresponding rise in the quantity of hæmoglobin, and in the
percentage volume of the corpuscles.

Other authors infer a relative and not an absolute increase in the
number of red corpuscles. E. Grawitz, for example, has expressed the
opinion that the raised count of corpuscles may be explained chiefly by
increased concentration of the blood, due to the greater loss of water
from the body at these altitudes. The blood of laboratory animals which
Grawitz allowed to live in correspondingly rarefied air underwent
similar changes. Von Limbeck, as well as Schumburg and Zuntz, object to
this explanation on the ground, that if loss of water caused such
considerable elevations in the number, we should observe a corresponding
diminution in the body weight, which is by no means the case.

Schumburg and Zuntz also regard the increase of red blood corpuscles in
the higher mountains as relative only, but explain it by an altered
distribution of the corpuscular elements within the vascular system. In
their earlier work Cohnstein and Zuntz had already established that the
number of corpuscles in the capillary blood varies with the width of the
vessels and the rate of flow in them. If one reflects how multifarious
are the merely physiological influences at the bottom of which these two
factors lie, one will not interpret alterations in the number of the red
corpuscles without bearing them in mind. In residence at high altitudes
various factors bring about alterations in the width of the vessels and
in the circulation. Amongst these are the intenser light (Fülles), the
lowering of temperature, increased muscular exertion, raised respiratory
activity. Doubtless, therefore, without either production of microcytes
or production _de novo_, the number of red corpuscles in capillary blood
may undergo considerable variations.

The opposition, in which as mentioned above, the views of Grawitz,
Zuntz, and Schumburg stand to those of the first mentioned authors,
finds its solution in the fact that the causes of altered distribution
of the blood, and of loss of water, play a large part in the sudden
changes. The longer the sojourn however at these great elevations, the
more insignificant they become (Viault).

We think therefore that from the material before us we may draw the
conclusion, that after long residence in elevated districts the number
of red blood corpuscles is absolutely raised. The therapeutic importance
of this influence is obvious.

Besides high altitudes, the influence of the tropics on the composition
of the blood and especially on the number of corpuscles has also been
tested. Eykmann as well as Glogner found no deviation from the normal,
although the almost constant pallor of the European in the tropics
points in that direction. Here also, changes in the distribution
occurring without qualitative changes of the blood seem chiefly
concerned.

       *       *       *       *       *

The same reliance cannot be placed on inferences based on the results of
the Thoma-Zeiss and similar counting methods for anæmic as for normal
blood, in which generally speaking all the red cells are of the same
size and contain the same amount of hæmoglobin. In the former the red
corpuscles, as we shall shew later, differ considerably one from
another. On the one hand forms poor in hæmoglobin, on the other very
small forms occur, which by the wet method of counting cannot even be
seen.

Apart even from these extreme forms, 1,000 =red blood corpuscles of
anæmic blood are not physiologically equivalent to the same number of
normal blood corpuscles=. Hence the necessity of closely correlating the
result of the count of red blood corpuscles with the hæmoglobinometric
and histological values. The first figure only, given apart from the
latter, is often misleading, especially in pathological cases.

It is therefore occasionally desirable to supplement the data of the
count by THE ESTIMATION OF THE SIZE OF THE RED BLOOD CORPUSCLES
INDIVIDUALLY. This is effected by direct measurement with the ocular
micrometer; and can be performed on wet (see below), as well as on dry
preparations, though the latter in general are to be preferred on
account of their far greater convenience.

Nevertheless the carrying out of this method requires particular care.
One can easily see that in normal blood the red corpuscles appear
smaller in the thicker than they do in the thinner layers of the dry
preparation. We may explain this difference as follows. In the thick
layers the red discs float in plasma before drying, whilst in the
thinner parts they are fastened to the glass by a capillary layer.
Desiccation occurs here nearly instantaneously, and starts from the
periphery of the disc; so that an alteration in the shape or size is
impossible. On the contrary the process of drying in the thicker
portions proceeds more slowly, and is therefore accompanied by a
shrinking of the discs.

Even in healthy persons small differences in the individual discs are
shewn by this method. The physiological average of the diameter of the
greater surface is, according to Laache, Hayem, Schumann and others, 8.5
µ for men and women (max. 9.0 µ. min. 6.5 µ.) In anæmic blood the
differences between the individual elements become greater, so that to
obtain the average value, the maxima, minima, and mean of a large number
of cells, chosen at random, are ascertained. =But with a high degree of
inequality of the discs this microscopical measurement loses all
scientific value.=

However valuable the knowledge of the absolute number may be for a
judgment on the course of the illness, it gives us no information about
the AMOUNT OF HÆMOGLOBIN IN THE BLOOD, which is the decisive measure of
the degree of the anæmia. A number of clinical methods are in use for
this estimation; first direct, such as the colorimetric estimation of
the amount of hæmoglobin, secondly indirect, such as the determination
of the specific gravity or of the volume of the red corpuscles, and
perhaps also the estimation of the dry substance of the total blood.

Among the direct methods for hæmoglobin estimation, which aim at the
measurement of the depth of colour of the blood, we wish first to
mention one, which though it lays no claim to great clinical accuracy
has often done us good service as a rapid indicator at the bedside. A
little blood is caught on a piece of linen or filter-paper, and allowed
to distribute itself in a thin layer. In this manner one can recognise
the difference between the colour of anæmic and of healthy blood more
clearly than in the drop as it comes from the finger prick. After a few
trials one can in this way draw conclusions as to the degree of the
existing anæmia. Could this simple method which is so convenient, which
can be carried out at the time of consultation, come more into vogue, it
alone would contribute to the decline of the favourite stop-gap
diagnosis, 'anæmia.' For neurasthenic patients also, who so often fancy
themselves anæmic and in addition look so, a _demonstratio ad oculos_
such as this is often sufficient to persuade them of the contrary.

Of the instruments for measuring the depth of colour of the blood, the
double pipette of Hoppe-Seyler is quite the most delicate. A solution of
carbonic oxide hæmoglobin, accurately titrated, serves as the standard
of comparison. The reliable preparation and conservation of the normal
solution is however attended with such difficulties, that this method is
not clinically available. In the last few years, Langemeister, a pupil
of Kühne's, has invented a method for colorimetric purposes, also
applicable to hæmoglobin estimations. The instrument depends on the
principle, that from the thickness of the layer in which the solution to
be tested has the same colour intensity as a normal solution, the amount
of colour can be calculated. As a normal solution Langemeister uses a
glycerine solution of methæmoglobin prepared from pig's blood. To our
knowledge this method has not yet been applied clinically. Its
introduction would be valuable, for in practice we must at present be
content with methods that are less exact, in which coloured glass or a
stable coloured solution serves as a measure for the depth of colour of
the blood. There are a number of instruments of this kind, of which the
"hæmometer" of Fleischl, and amongst others, the "hæmoglobinometer" of
Gowers, distinguished by its low price, are specially used for clinical
purposes. Both instruments give the percentage of the hæmoglobin of
normal blood which the blood examined contains, and are sufficiently
exact in their results for practical purposes and for relative values;
although errors up to 10% and over occur with unpractised observers.
(Cp. K. H. Mayer.) Quite recently Biernacki has raised the objection to
the colorimetric methods of the quantitative estimation of hæmoglobin,
that the depth of colour of the blood is dependent not only on the
quantity of hæmoglobin but also on the colour of the plasma, and the
greater or less amount of proteid in the blood. These errors are quite
inconsiderable for the above-mentioned instruments, since here the blood
is so highly diluted with water that the possible original differences
are thereby reduced to zero.

Among the methods for indirect hæmoglobin estimation, that of
calculation from the amount of iron in the blood appears to be quite
exact, since hæmoglobin possesses a constant quantity of iron of 0.42
per cent. This calculation may be allowed in all cases for normal blood,
for here there is a really exact proportion between the amounts of
hæmoglobin and of iron. Recently A. Jolles has described an apparatus
for quantitative estimation of the iron of the blood, called a
"ferrometer;" which renders possible an accurate valuation of the iron
in small amounts of blood. However for pathological cases this method of
hæmoglobin estimation from the iron present is not to be recommended.
For if one tests the blood of an anæmic patient under the microscope for
iron one finds the iron reaction in numerous red blood corpuscles. This
means the presence of iron which is not a normal constituent of
hæmoglobin. Other iron may be contained in the morphological elements
(including the white corpuscles) as a combination of proteid with iron,
which is not directly recognisable. It is further known that in anæmias
the amount of iron of all organs is greatly raised (Quincke), apparently
often the result of a raised destruction of hæmoglobin ("waste iron,"
"spodogenous iron"). In many cases too, it should be borne in mind that
the administration of iron increases the amount of iron in the blood and
organs.

From these considerations we see how unreliable in pathological cases is
the calculation of the amount of hæmoglobin from the amount of iron. We
have been particularly led to these observations by the work of
Biernacki, since the procedure of inferring the amount of hæmoglobin
from the amount of iron has led to really remarkable conclusions. For
example, amongst other things, he found the iron in two cases of mild,
and one of severe chlorosis quite normal. He concludes that chlorosis,
and other anæmias, shew no diminution, but even a relative increase of
hæmoglobin: but that other proteids of the blood on the contrary are
reduced. These difficult iron estimations stand out very sharply from
the results of other authors and could only be accepted after the most
careful confirmation. But the above analysis shews, that in any case the
far-reaching conclusions which Biernacki has attached to his results are
insecure. For these questions especially, complete estimations with the
aid of the ferrometer of A. Jolles are to be desired.

Great importance has always been attached to the investigation of the
SPECIFIC GRAVITY of the blood; since the density of the blood affords a
measure of the number of corpuscles, and of their hæmoglobin equivalent.
It is easy to collect observations, as in the last few years two methods
have come into use which require only a small quantity of material, and
do not appear to be too complicated for practical clinical purposes. One
of these has been worked out by R. Schmaltz, in which small amounts of
blood are exactly weighed in capillary glass tubes (the capillary
pyknometric method). The other is A. Hammerschlag's, in which, by a
variation of a principle which was first invented by Fano, that mixture
of chloroform and benzol is ascertained in which the blood to be
examined floats, _i.e._ which possesses exactly the specific gravity of
the blood[2].

According to the researches of these authors and numerous others who
have used their own methods, the specific gravity of the total blood is
physiologically 1058-1062, or on the average 1059 (1056 in women). The
specific gravity of the serum amounts to 1029-1032--on the average 1030.
From which it at once follows that the red corpuscles must be the chief
cause of the great weight of the blood. If their number diminishes, or
their number remaining constant, they lose in hæmoglobin, or in volume,
the specific gravity would be correspondingly lowered. We should
therefore expect a low specific gravity in all anæmic conditions.
Similarly with an increased number of corpuscles, and a high hæmoglobin
equivalent, an increase in the density of the total blood makes its
appearance.

Hammerschlag has found in a large number of experiments that the
relation between the specific gravity and the amount of hæmoglobin is
much closer than between the specific gravity and the number of
corpuscles. The former in fact is so constant that it may be represented
by a table.

     Sp. gravity      Quantity of Hæmoglobin
                        (Fleischl's method)

     1033-1035              25-30%
     1035-1038              30-35%
     1038-1040              35-40%
     1040-1045              40-45%
     1045-1048              45-55%
     1048-1050              55-65%
     1050-1053              65-70%
     1053-1055              70-75%
     1055-1057              75-85%
     1057-1060              85-95%

In a paper which has quite recently appeared Diabella has investigated
these relations very thoroughly, and his results partly correct, and
partly confirm those of Hammerschlag. Diabella found from his
comparative estimations that differences of 10% hæmoglobin (Fleischl)
correspond in general to differences of 4.46 per thousand in the
specific gravity (Hammerschlag's method). Nevertheless with the same
amount of hæmoglobin, differences up to 13.5 per thousand are to be
observed; and these departures are greater the richer the blood in
hæmoglobin. Regular differences exist between men and women; the latter
have, with the same amount of hæmoglobin, a specific gravity lower by 2
to 2.5.

Should the parallelism between the number of red blood corpuscles and
the amount of hæmoglobin be considerably disturbed, the influence of the
stroma of the red discs on the specific gravity of the blood will then
be recognisable. Diabella calculates, that with the same amount of
hæmoglobin in two blood testings, the stroma may effect differences of
3-5 per thousand in the specific gravity.

Hence the estimation of the specific gravity is often sufficient for the
determination of the relative amount of hæmoglobin of a blood. It is
only in cases of nephritis and in circulatory disturbances, and in
leukæmia, that the relations between specific gravity and quantity of
hæmoglobin are too much masked by other influences.

The physiological variations which the specific gravity undergoes under
the influence of the taking in and excretion of fluid do not exceed
0.003 (Schmaltz). From what has been said, it follows that all
variations must correspond with similarly occurring variations in the
factors that underlie the amount of hæmoglobin and the number of
corpuscles.

More recent authors, in particular Hammerschlag, v. Jaksch, v. Limbeck,
Biernacki, Dunin, E. Grawitz, A. Loewy, have avoided an omission of many
earlier investigators; for besides the estimation of the specific
gravity of the total blood, they have carried out that of one at least
of its constituents, either of the corpuscles or of the serum. The red
blood corpuscles have consistently shewn themselves as almost
exclusively concerned with variations in the specific gravity of the
total blood; partly by variations in number, or changes in their
distribution; partly by their chemical instability; loss of water and
absorption of water, and variations in the amount of iron.

The plasma of the blood on the contrary--and there is no essential
difference between plasma and serum (Hammerschlag)--is much more
constant. Even in severe pathological conditions, in which the total
blood has become much lighter, the serum preserves its physiological
constitution, or undergoes but relatively slight variations in
consistence. Considerable diminutions in the specific gravity of the
serum are much less frequently observed in primary blood diseases, than
in chronic kidney diseases, and disturbances of the circulation. E.
Grawitz has lately recorded that in certain anæmias, especially
posthæmorrhagic and those following inanition, the specific gravity of
the serum undergoes perceptible diminutions[3].

There are still therefore many contradictions in these results, and it
is evidently necessary in a scientific investigation always to give the
specific gravity of the serum and of the corpuscles, in addition to
that of the total blood.

A method closely related to the estimation of the specific gravity is
the direct estimation of the dried substance of the total blood,
"HYGRÆMOMETRY"; the clinical introduction of which we owe to Stintzing
and Gumprecht. This method is really supplementary to those so far
mentioned, and like them can be carried out with the small amounts of
blood obtainable at the bedside without difficulty. Small quantities of
blood are received in weighed glass vessels: which are then weighed,
dried at 65°-70° C. for 24 hours and then weighed again. The figures so
obtained for the dried substance have a certain independent importance;
for they do not run quite parallel with those of the specific gravity,
amount of hæmoglobin or number of corpuscles. The normal values are, for
men 21.26%, for women 19.8%.

A further procedure for obtaining indirect evidence of the amount of
hæmoglobin is the DETERMINATION OF THE VOLUME OF BLOOD CORPUSCLES IN 100
PARTS OF TOTAL BLOOD. For this estimation a method is desirable, which
allows of the separation of the corpuscles from plasma in blood, that is
as far as possible unaltered. The older methods do not fulfil this
requirement; since they recommend either defibrination of the blood
(quite impossible with the quantities of blood which are generally
clinically available); or keeping it fluid by the addition of sodium
oxalate or other substances which prevent coagulation. The separation of
the two constituents can be effected by simply allowing the blood to
settle, or with the centrifugal machine, specially constructed for the
blood by Blix-Hedin and Gärtner ("Hæmatocrit").

For these methods various diluting fluids are used, such as
physiological saline solution, 2.5% of potassium bichromate and many
others. According to H. Koeppe they are not indifferent as far as the
volume of the red blood corpuscles is concerned; and a solution which
does not affect the cells must be previously ascertained for each
specimen of blood. For this reason attention may be called to the
proceeding of M. Herz, in which the clotting of the blood in the pipette
is prevented by rendering the walls absolutely smooth by the application
of cod-liver oil. Koeppe has slightly varied this method; he fills his
handily constructed pipette, very carefully cleaned, with cedar wood
oil, and sucks up the blood, as it comes from the fingerprick into the
filled pipette. The blood displaces the oil, and as it only comes into
contact with perfectly smooth surfaces, it remains fluid. By means of a
centrifugal machine, of which he has constructed a very convenient
variation, the oil as the lighter body is completely removed from the
blood; and the plasma is also separated from the corpuscles. Three
sharply defined layers are then visible, the layer of oil above, the
plasma layer, and the layer of the red blood corpuscles. In as much as
the apparatus is calibrated, the relation between the volumes of the
plasma and corpuscles can be read off. No microscopical alterations in
the corpuscles are to be observed.

Though this procedure seems very difficult of execution, it is
nevertheless the only one, which has really advanced clinical pathology.
The results of Koeppe--not as yet very numerous--give the total volume
of the red corpuscles as 51.1-54.8%, an average of 52.6%.

M. and L. Bleibtreu have endeavoured indirectly to ascertain the
relation of the volume of the corpuscles to that of the plasma.
Mixtures of blood with physiological saline solution in various
proportions are made, in each the amount of nitrogen in the fluid which
is left after the corpuscles have settled is estimated. With the aid of
quantities so obtained they calculate mathematically the volume of the
serum and corpuscles respectively. Apart from the fact that a dilution
with salt solution is also here involved, this method is too complicated
and requires amounts of blood too large for clinical purposes. Th.
Pfeiffer has tried to introduce it clinically in suitable cases, but has
not so far succeeded in obtaining definite results. That, however, the
relations between the relative volume of the red corpuscles and quantity
of hæmoglobin are by no means constant, is well shewn by conditions (for
example the acute anæmias) in which an "acute swelling" of the
individual red discs occurs (M. Herz), but without a corresponding
increase in hæmoglobin. The same conclusion results from recent
observations of v. Limbeck, that in catarrhal jaundice a considerable
increase of volume of the red blood corpuscles comes to pass under the
influence of the salts of the bile acids.

As we have several times insisted, the quantity of hæmoglobin affords
the most important measure of the severity of an anæmic condition. Those
methods which neither directly nor indirectly give an indication of the
amount of hæmoglobin are only so far of interest that they possibly
afford an elucidation of the special pathogenesis of blood diseases in
particular cases. To these belong the ESTIMATION OF THE ALKALINITY OF
THE BLOOD, which in spite of extended observations has not yet obtained
importance in the pathology of the blood.

A value to which perhaps attention will be more directed than it has up
to the present time by clinicians is the RATE OF COAGULATION OF THE
BLOOD, for which comparative results may be obtained by Wright's handy
apparatus, the "Coagulometer." In certain conditions, particularly in
acute exanthemata, and in the various forms of the hæmorrhagic
diathesis, the clotting time is distinctly increased, or indeed clotting
may remain in abeyance. Occasionally a distinct acceleration in the
clotting, compared with the normal, may be observed. Wright has further
ascertained in his excellent researches, that the clotting time can be
influenced by drugs: calcium chloride, carbonic acid raise, citric acid,
alcohol and increased respiration diminish the clotting power of the
blood.

Recently Hayem has repeatedly called attention to a condition, that is
probably closely connected with the coagulability of the blood. Although
coagulation has set in, the separation of the SERUM FROM THE CLOT occurs
only very slightly or not at all. Hayem asserts, that he has found such
blood in Purpura hæmorrhagica, Anæmia perniciosa protopathica, malarial
cachexia: and some infectious diseases.

For such observations large amounts of blood are needed, which are
clinically not frequently available. Certain precautions must be
observed, as has been ascertained in the preparation of diphtheria
serum, so that the yield of serum may be the largest possible. Amongst
these that the blood should be received in longish vessels, which must
be especially carefully cleaned, and free from all traces of fat. If the
blood-clot does not spontaneously retract it must be freed from the side
of the glass with a flat instrument like a paper-knife without injuring
it. If no clot occurs in the cold, a result may perhaps follow at blood
temperature.

In spite however of all artifices and all care, it is here and there,
under pathological conditions, impossible to obtain even a trace of
serum from considerable amounts of blood. In a horse for example which
was immunised against diphtheria, and had before yielded an unusually
large quantity of serum, Ehrlich was able to obtain from 22 kg. of blood
scarcely 100 cc. serum, when the animal was bled on account of a tetanus
infection.

Perhaps a larger _rôle_ is to be allotted in the diseases of the blood
to these conditions. Hayem already turns the incomplete production of
serum to account, for distinguishing protopathic pernicious anæmia from
other severe anæmic conditions. A bad prognosis too may be made when for
example in cachetic states this phenomenon is to be observed.

A few methods still remain to be mentioned which test THE RESISTANCE OF
THE RED BLOOD CORPUSCLES to external injuries of various kinds.

Landois, Hamburger and v. Limbeck ascertain for instance the degree of
concentration of a salt solution, in which the red corpuscles are
preserved ("isotonic concentration," Hamburger) and those which cause an
exit of the hæmoglobin from the stroma. The erythrocytes are the more
resistant, the weaker the concentration which leaves them still
uninjured.

Laker tests the red blood corpuscles as regards their resistance to the
electric discharge from a Leyden jar, and measures it by the number of
discharges up to which the blood in question remains uninjured.

Clinical observation has not yet gained much by these methods. So much
only is certain, that in certain diseases: anæmia, hæmoglobinuria, and
after many intoxications, the resistance, as measured by the methods
above indicated, is considerably lowered.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] For the estimation of the numbers of white corpuscles, relatively to
the red, and of the different kinds relatively to each other, see the
section on the morphology.

[2] In Roy's method, mixtures of glycerine and water are used. By means
of a curved pipette, the drop of blood is brought into the fluid, and
its immediate motion observed. Lazarus Barlow has modified this method.
He employs mixtures of gum and water, and instead of several tubes, one
only; and into this the mixtures are introduced, those of higher
specific gravity being naturally at the bottom. The alternate layers are
coloured, and remain distinguishable for several hours.

[3] In conditions of shock experimentally produced, the specific gravity
of the total blood is increased, that of the plasma, however, is
diminished (Roy and Cobbett).




THE MORPHOLOGY OF THE BLOOD.




A. METHODS OF INVESTIGATION.


A glance at the history of the microscopy of the blood shews that it
falls into two periods. In the first, which is especially distinguished
by the work of Virchow and Max Schultze, a quantity of positive
knowledge was quickly won, and the different forms of anæmia were
recognised. But close upon this followed a standstill, which lasted for
some decades, the cause of which lay in the circumstance that observers
confined themselves to the examination of fresh blood. What in fact was
to be seen with the aid of this simple method, these distinguished
observers had quickly exhausted. That these methods were inadequate is
best shewn by the history of leucocytosis, which after the precedent of
Virchow was in general referred to an increased production on the part
of the lymphatic glands; and further by the imperfect distinction
between leucocytosis and incipient leukæmia, which was drawn almost
exclusively from purely numerical estimations. It was only after Ehrlich
had introduced the new methods of investigation by means of stained dry
preparations, that the histology of the blood received the impulse for
its second period.

We owe to them the exact distinction between the several kinds of white
blood corpuscles, a rational definition of leukæmia, polynuclear
leucocytosis, and the knowledge of the appearances of degeneration and
regeneration of the red blood corpuscles, and of their degeneration in
hæmoglobinæmic conditions. The same process, then, has gone on in the
microscopy of the blood that we see in other branches of normal and
pathological histology: by advances in method, advances in knowledge
full of importance result. It is therefore little comprehensible, that
an author quite recently should recommend a reversion to the old
methods, and emphatically announce that he has managed to make a
diagnosis in all cases, with the examination of fresh blood. At the
present time, after the most important points have been cleared up by
new methods, in the large majority of cases, this is not an astonishing
achievement. For any difficult case (for instance the early recognition
of malignant lymphoma, certain rare forms of anæmia, etc.) as the
experienced know, the dry stained preparation is indispensable. The
object of examining the blood, is certainly not to make a rapid
diagnosis, but to investigate exactly the individual details of the
blood picture. To-day, we can only take the standpoint, that everything
that is to be seen in fresh specimens--apart from the quite unimportant
rouleaux formation, and the amoeboid movements--can be seen equally
well, and indeed much better in a stained preparation; and that there
are several important details which are only made visible in the latter,
and never in wet preparations.

As regards the purely technical side of the question, the examination of
stained dry specimens is far more convenient than that of fresh. For it
leaves us quite independent of time and place, we can keep the dried
blood with few precautions for months at a time, before proceeding to
further microscopic treatment; and the examination of the preparation
may last as long as required, and can be repeated at any time. On the
contrary, the examination of the wet preparation is only possible at the
bedside, and must be conducted within so short a time, on account of the
changeability of the blood, clotting, destruction of white corpuscles
and so forth, that a searching investigation cannot be undertaken. In
addition the preparation and staining of dried blood specimens is
amongst the simplest and most convenient of the methods of clinical
histology. In the interest of its wider dissemination, it will be
justifiable to describe it more in detail.

We must also mention here the use of the dry preparation in the
estimation of the important relation between the number of the red and
of the white corpuscles; and also of the relative numbers of different
kinds of white blood corpuscles.

For this purpose, faultless specimens, specially regularly spread, are
indispensable. Quadratic ocular diaphragms (Ehrlich-Zeiss) are
requisite, which form a series, so that the sides of the squares are as
1:2:3 ... :10, the fields therefore as 1:4:9 ... :100. The eye-piece
made by Leitz after Ehrlich's directions is more convenient, in which,
by a handy device, definite square fractions of the field can be
obtained. The enumeration is made as follows. The white blood corpuscles
are first counted in any desired field with the diaphragm no. 10, that
is with the area of 100. Without changing the field, the diaphragm 1,
which only leaves free a hundredth part of this area, is now put in, and
the red corpuscles are counted. The field is then changed at random, and
the red corpuscles counted in a portion of the area which represents the
hundredth of that of the white. About 100 such counts are to be made in
a specimen. The average of the red corpuscles is then multiplied by 100
and so placed in proportion with the sum of the white. If the white
corpuscles are very numerous, so that counting each one in a large field
is inconvenient, smaller sections of the eye-piece 81, 64, 49, etc. may
be taken.

The important estimation of the percentage relation of the various forms
of leucocytes is effected by the simple "typing" of several hundred
cells, a count which for the practised observer is completed in less
than a quarter of an hour.


[alpha] Preparation of the dry specimen.

To obtain unexceptionable preparations cover-slips of particular quality
are necessary. They should not be thicker than 0.08 to 0.10 mm., the
glass must not be brittle or faulty, and must in this thickness easily
allow of considerable bending, without breaking. Every unevenness of the
slip renders it useless for our purposes. The glasses must previously be
particularly carefully cleaned, and all fat removed. It is generally
sufficient to allow the slips to remain in ether for about half-an-hour,
not covering one another. Each one still wet with ether is then wiped
with soft, not coarse, linen rag or with tissue-paper. The slips now are
put into alcohol for a few minutes, are dried in the same manner as from
the ether, and are kept ready for use in a dust-tight watch-glass.
Bearing in mind, that these cover-slips are not cut out from a flat
piece but from the surface of a sphere, it is evident that only with
glasses thus prepared, can it be expected that a capillary space should
be formed between two of them, in which the blood spreads easily. For
with the smallest unevenness or brittleness of the glass it is an
impossibility for the one to fit every bend of the other. And it is only
then that the slips can be drawn away one from another, without using a
force which breaks them.

To avoid fresh soiling of the cover-slips, and above all the contact of
the blood with the moisture coming from the finger, the cover-glass is
held with forceps[4] to receive the blood. We recommend for the under
cover-glass a clamp forceps _a_, with broad, smooth blades; the ends may
be covered with leather or blotting-paper for a distance of about 1/2
in. For the other cover-slip a very light spring forceps _b_, with
smooth blades, sharp at the tips, is used, with which a cover-glass can
be easily picked up from a flat surface. The lower slip is now fixed by
one edge in the clamp forceps, and held ready in the left hand. The
right hand applies the upper glass with the forceps _b_ to the drop of
blood as it exudes from the puncture, and takes it up, without touching
the finger itself. The forceps _b_ is then quickly brought to _a_ and
the slip with the little drop of blood allowed to fall lightly on the
other. In glasses of the right quality the drop distributes itself
spontaneously in a completely regular capillary layer. With two fingers
of the right hand on the edge of the upper glass, it is now carefully
pulled from the lower, which remains fixed in the clamp, without
pressing or lifting. Frequently only one, the lower, shews a regular
layer, but occasionally both are available for examination. During the
desiccation in the air, generally complete in 10-30 seconds, the
preparations must naturally be protected from any dampness (for example
the breath of the patient).

The extent of surface which is covered depends on the size of the drop,
the smaller the latter, the smaller the surface over which it has to be
spread. Large drops are quite useless, for with them, the one
cover-glass swims on the other, instead of adhering to it.

Although a written description of these manipulations makes the method
seem rather intricate, yet but little practice is required to obtain an
easy and sure mastery over it. We have felt compelled to describe the
method minutely, since preparations so often come under our notice
which, although made by scientific men, who pursue hæmatological
investigations, are only to be described as technically completely
inadequate.

The specimens so obtained, after they are completely dried in the air,
should be kept between layers of filter-paper in well closed vessels
till further treatment. In important cases, preparations of which it is
desirable to keep for some considerable time, some of the specimens
should be kept from atmospheric influences by covering them with a
layer of paraffin. The paraffin must be removed by toluol before
proceeding further. The preparations must naturally be kept in the dark.


[beta]. Fixation of the dry specimen.

All methods of staining available for the blood require the fixing of
the proteids of the blood. A general formula cannot be given, since the
intensity of the fixation must be regulated in accordance with the kind
of stain that is chosen. Relatively slight degrees of hardening suffice
for staining in simple watery solutions, for example, in the triacid
fluid, and can be attained by a short, and not too intense action of
several reagents. For other methods, in which solutions that are
strongly acid or alkaline are employed, it is however necessary to fix
the structure much more strongly. But here, too, an excess as well as an
insufficiency must be guarded against. It is easy with the few staining
fluids that are in use to ascertain the optimum for each.

The following means of fixation are employed.


1. Dry Heat.

A simple plate of copper on a stand is used, under one end of which
burns a Bunsen flame. After some time a certain constancy in the
temperature of the plate is reached, the part nearest to the flame is
hottest, that farther away is cooler. By dropping water, toluol, xylol,
etc. on to it, one can fairly easily ascertain that point of the plate
which has reached the boiling temperature of the particular fluid.

Far more convenient is Victor Meyer's apparatus, used by chemists. This
consists of a copper boiler, modified for our purpose, with a roof of
thin copper-plate, perforated for the opening of the vapour tube. Small
quantities of toluol are allowed to boil for a few minutes in the
boiler, and the copper-plate soon reaches the temperature of 107°-110°.

For the ordinary staining reagents (in watery fluids) it is enough to
place the air-dried preparation at about 110° C. for one half to two
minutes. For differential staining mixtures, for instance the
eosin-aurantia-nigrosin mixture, a time of two hours is necessary, or
higher temperatures must be employed.


2. Chemical means.

_a._ To obtain a good triacid stain, the preparations may be hardened,
according to Nikiforoff, in a mixture of absolute alcohol and ether of
equal parts, for two hours. The beauty of specimens fixed by heat is
however not quite fully reached by this method.

_b._ Absolute alcohol fixes dried specimens in five minutes sufficiently
to stain them subsequently with Chenzinsky's fluid, or hæmatoxylin-eosin
solution. It is an advantage in many cases, especially when rapid
investigation is required, to boil the dried preparation in a test-tube
in absolute alcohol for one minute.

_c._ Formalin in 1% alcoholic solution was first used by Benario for
fixing blood preparations. The fixation is complete in one minute, and
the granulations can be demonstrated. Benario recommends this method of
fixing, especially for the hæmatoxylin-eosin staining.

These methods are described as the most suitable for
blood-investigation in general. For special purposes, for instance, the
demonstration of mitoses, blood platelets, etc., other hardening
reagents may be used with advantage: Sublimate, osmic acid, Flemming's
fluid, and so forth.


[gamma]. Staining of the dry specimen.

Staining methods may be classified according to the purpose to which
they are adapted.

We use first those which are suitable for a simple general view. For
this it is sufficient to use such solutions as stain hæmoglobin and
nuclei simultaneously. (Hæmatoxylin-eosin, hæmatoxylin-orange).

Occasionally a stain is desirable which only brings out, but in a
characteristic manner, a special kind of cell, _e.g._ the eosinophils,
mast cells, or bacteria. Single staining is attained on the principle of
maximal decoloration. (Cp. E. Westphal.)

Finally, we have panoptic staining; that is, by methods which bring out,
as characteristically as possible, the greatest number of elements.
Although we must use high magnifications with these stains, we are
compensated by a knowledge of the blood condition that cannot be reached
in any other way. A double stain is generally insufficient, and at least
three different dyes are used.

Successive staining was formerly used for this purpose. But everyone who
has used this method knows how difficult it is to get constant results,
however careful one may be in the concentration and time of action of
the stain.

Simultaneous staining offers undoubted and important advantages. As
there is much obscurity with regard to the principle on which it rests
we may here shortly explain the theory of simultaneous staining.

We will begin with the simplest example: the use of picro-carmine, a
mixture of neutral ammonium carmine and ammonium picrate. In a tissue
rich in protoplasm, carmine alone stains diffusely, though the nuclei
are clearly brought out. But if we add an equally concentrated solution
of ammonium picrate, the staining gains extraordinarily in distinctness,
in as much as now certain parts are pure yellow, others pure red. The
best known example is the staining of muscle with picro-carmine, by
which the muscle substance appears pure yellow, the nuclei pure red. If,
however, instead of ammonium picrate we add another nitro dye which
contains more nitro-groups than picric acid, for example the ammonium
salt of hexa-nitro-diphenylamine, the carmine stain is completely
abolished, all parts stain in the pure aurantia colour. The explanation
of this phenomenon is obvious. Myosin has a greater affinity for
ammonium picrate than for the carmine salt, and therefore in a mixture
of the two combines with the yellow dye. Owing to this combination it is
not now in a condition to chemically fix even carmine. Further, the
nuclei have a great affinity for the carmine, and therefore stain pure
red in this process. If, however, nitro dyes be added to the carmine
solution, which have an affinity for all tissues, and also for the
nuclei, the sphere of action of the carmine becomes continually smaller,
and finally by the addition of the most powerful nitro body, the
hexa-nitro compound, is completely abolished. Connective tissue and bone
substance, however, behave differently with the picro-carmine mixture,
in as much as here the diffuse stain depends exclusively on the
concentration of the carmine, and is quite uninfluenced by the addition
of a chemical antidote. This staining can only be limited by dilution,
but not by the addition of opposed dyes. We must look upon the latter
kind of tissue stain not as a chemical combination, but as a mechanical
attraction of the stain on the part of the tissue. We may also say:
=chemical stains are to be recognised by the fact that they react to
chemical antidotes; mechanical stains to physical influences=; of course
always assuming, that purely neutral solutions are employed, and that
all additions, which alter the chemical relation of the tissues such as
alkalis and acids, or which raise or limit the affinity of the dye for
the tissues, are avoided. A further consequence of this view is, that
all successive double staining may be serviceably replaced by
simultaneous multiple staining, if the chemical nature of the staining
process is settled. In contradistinction, in all double stains, which
can only be effected by successive staining, mechanical factors are
concerned.

In the staining of the dry blood specimen, purely chemical staining
processes are concerned, and therefore the polychromatic combination
stain is possible in all cases.

The following combinations are possible for the blood:

1. Combined staining with acid dyes. The best known example is the
eosin-aurantia-nigrosin mixture, in which the hæmoglobin takes on an
orange, the nuclei a black, and the acidophil granulations a red hue.

2. Mixtures of basic dyes. It is possible straight away to make mixtures
consisting of two basic dyes. As specially suitable we must mention
fuchsin, methyl green, methyl violet, methylene blue. On the other hand,
mixtures of three bases are fairly difficult to prepare, and the
quantitative relations of the constituents must be exactly observed. For
such mixtures, fuchsin, bismarck brown, chrome green, may be used.

3. Neutral mixtures. These have played an important part in general
histology, from the time that they were first introduced by Ehrlich into
the histology of the blood up to the present day; and deserve before all
others a full consideration.

Neutral staining rests on the fact, that nearly all basic dyes (_i.e._
salts of the dye bases, for instance, rosanilin acetate) form
combinations with acid dyes (_i.e._ salts of the dye acids, for
instance, ammonium picrate) which are to be regarded as neutral dyes,
such as rosanilin picrate. Their employment offers considerable
difficulties as they are very imperfectly soluble in water. A practical
application of them was first possible after Ehrlich had ascertained
that certain series of the neutral dyes are easily soluble in excess of
the acid dye, and so the preparation of solutions of the required
strength, readily kept, was made possible. Among the basic dyes which
are suitable for this purpose are those particularly which contain the
ammonium group, especially methyl green, methylene blue, amethyst
violet[5] (tetraethylsafraninchloride), and to a certain extent pyronin
and rhodamin also. In contradistinction to these, the members of the
triphenylmethan series, such as fuchsin, methyl violet, bismarck brown,
phosphin, indazine, are in general less suited for the purpose, with the
exception of methyl green already mentioned. The acid dyes specially
suited for the production of soluble neutral stains are the easily
soluble salts of the polysulpho-acids. The salts of the carbonyl acids
and other acid phenol dyes are but little suitable: and least of all,
the nitro dyes. Specially to be mentioned among the acid dye series are
those which can be used for the preparation of the neutral mixtures:
orange g., acid fuchsin, narcëin (an easy soluble yellow dye, the sodium
salt of sulphanilic acid--hydrazo-[beta]-naphtholsulphonic acid).

If a solution of methyl green be allowed to fall drop by drop into a
solution of an acid dye, for instance orange g., a coarse precipitate
first results, which dissolves completely on the further addition of the
orange. No more orange should be added than is necessary for complete
solution. This is the type of a simple neutral staining fluid.
Chemically the above-mentioned example may be thus explained; in this
mixture all three basic groups of the methyl green are united with the
acid dye, so that we have produced a triacid compound of methyl green.

Simple neutral mixtures, which have one constituent in common, may be
combined together straight away. This is very important for triple
staining, which can only be attained by mixing together two simple
neutral mixtures, each consisting of two components. A chemical
decomposition need not be feared. We thus get mixtures containing three
and more colours. Theoretically there are two possibilities for such
combinations:

1. Staining mixtures of 1 acid and 2 basic dyes,

     _e.g._  orange--amethyst--methyl green;
            narcëin--pyronin--methyl green;
            narcëin--pyronin--methylene blue.

2. Staining mixtures of 2 acids and 1 base, in particular the mixture to
be described later in detail of

           orange g.--acid fuchsin--methyl green.
     Further narcëin--acid fuchsin--methyl green,

and the corresponding combinations with methylene blue, and amethyst
violet may be mentioned.

The importance of these neutral staining solutions lies in the fact that
they pick out definite substances, which would not be demonstrated by
the individual components, and which we therefore call =neutrophil=.

Elements which have an affinity for basic dyes, such as nuclear
substances, stain in these neutral mixtures purely in the colour of the
basic dye; acidophil elements in that of one of the two acid dyes;
whilst those portions of tissue which from their constitution have an
equal affinity for acid and basic dyes, attract the neutral compound, as
such, and therefore stain in the mixed colour.

       *       *       *       *       *

The eosine-methylene blue mixtures are exceptional in so far, that it is
possible with them, for a short time at least, to preserve active
solutions, in which with an excess of basic methylene blue, enough eosin
is dissolved for both to come into play. A drawback however of such
mixtures is, that in them precipitates are very easily produced, which
render the preparation quite useless. This danger is particularly great
in freshly prepared solutions. In solutions, such as Chenzinsky's, which
can be kept active for a longer time, it is less. Hence fresh solutions
stain far more intensely and more variously than older ones, and are
therefore used in special cases (see page 46). If the stain is
successful the appearances are very instructive. Nuclei are blue,
hæmoglobin red, neutrophil granulation violet, acidophil pure red, mast
cell granulation deep blue, forming one of the most beautiful
microscopic pictures.

For practical purposes, besides the iodine and iodine-eosine solution
described below (see page 46) the following are especially used:

1. =Hæmatoxylin solution with eosin or orange g.=

     Eosin (cryst.)             0.5
     Hæmatoxylin                2.0
     Alcohol abs.
     Aqu. dest.
     Glycerine _aa_           100.0
     Glacial acetic acid       10.0
     Alum in excess

The fluid must stand for some weeks. The preparations, fixed in absolute
alcohol, or by short heating, stain in from half-an-hour to two hours.
The hæmoglobin and eosinophil granules are red, the nuclei stain in the
colour of hæmatoxylin. The solution must be very carefully washed off.

2. In the practical application of the triacid fluid, particular care
must be taken, as M. Heidenhain first shewed, that the dyes are
=chemically pure=[6]. Formerly granules, apparently basophil, were
frequently observed in the white blood corpuscles, particularly in the
region of the nucleus. They were not recognised, even by practised
observers (_e.g._ Neusser) as artificial, but were regarded as
preformed, and were described as perinuclear forms. Since the employment
of pure dyes these appearances, whose meaning for a long time puzzled
us, are but seldom seen.

Saturated watery solutions of the three dyes are first prepared, and
cleared by standing for some considerable time. The following mixture is
now made:

     13-14 c.c.  Orange-g. solution
       6-7 c.c.  Acid fuchsin solution
        15 c.c.  Aqu. dest.
        15 c.c.  Alcohol
      12.5 c.c.  Methyl green
        10 c.c.  Alcohol
        10 c.c.  Glycerine

These fluids are measured in the above-mentioned order, with the same
measuring glass; and from the addition of methyl green onwards the fluid
is thoroughly shaken. The solution can be used at once, and keeps
indefinitely. The staining of the blood specimen in triacid requires
only a little fixation, cp. page 35. The stain is completed in five
minutes at most.

The nuclei are greenish, the red blood corpuscles orange, the acidophil
granulation copper red, the neutrophil violet. The mast cells stand out
by "negative staining" as peculiar bright, almost white cells, with
nuclei of a pale green colour.

The triacid stain is very convenient. It is much to be recommended for
good general preparations; =it is indispensable in all cases where the
study of the neutrophil granulations is concerned=.

3. =Basic double staining.= Saturated, watery methyl-green solution is
mixed with alcoholic fuchsin.

The stain, which only requires a small fixation, is completed in a few
minutes, and colours the nuclei green, the red blood corpuscles red, the
protoplasm of the leucocytes fuchsin colour. It is therefore specially
suited for demonstration preparations of lymphatic leukæmia.

4. Eosin-methylene blue mixtures, for example Chenzinsky's fluid:

     Concentrated watery methylene blue solution  40 c.c.
     1/2% eosin solution in 70% alcohol           20 c.c.
     Aqua dest.                                   40 c.c.

This fluid is fairly stable, but must always be filtered before use. It
only requires a fixation of the specimen for five minutes in absolute
alcohol. The staining takes 6-24 hours (in air-tight watch-glasses) at
blood temperature. The nuclei and the mast cell granulations stain deep
blue, malaria plasmodia light sky blue, red corpuscles and eosinophil
granules a fine red.

This solution is particularly suited for the study of the nuclei, the
baso and eosinophil granulations, and it is used by preference for
anæmic blood, and also for lymphatic leukæmia.

5. 10 c.c. of a 1 per cent. watery eosin solution, with 8 c.c. methylal,
and 10 c.c. of a saturated watery solution of methylene blue are mixed,
and used at once, see page 41. Time of staining 1, at most 2 minutes.
The staining is characteristic only in preparations very carefully fixed
by heat. The mast cell granulations are stained pure blue, the
eosinophil red, the neutrophil in mixed colour.

6. Jenner's stain consists of a solution in methyl alcohol of the
precipitate formed by adding eosine to methylene blue.

     Grubler's water soluble eosine, yellow 1.25% }    a.a. watery
         "     medicinal, methylene blue 1%       }    solutions.

Precipitate allowed to stand 24 hours, and then dried at 55°. It is then
made up to 1/2% in methyl alcohol (Merck). The stain may be obtained
from R. Kanthack, 18, Berners Street, London, ready for use. It is
exceedingly sensitive to acids and alkalis. Fixation is effected by
heat. Time of staining 1-4 minutes.

Before we pass to the histology of the blood, two important methods may
be described, for which the dried blood preparation is employed
directly, without previous fixation: 1. the recognition of glycogen in
the blood; 2. the microscopic test of the distribution of the alkali of
the blood.


1. _Recognition of glycogen in blood._

This may be effected in two ways. The original procedure consisted in
putting the preparation into a drop of thick cleared iodine-indiarubber
solution under the microscope, as had been already recommended by
Ehrlich for the recognition of glycogen.

The following method is still better. The preparation is placed in a
closed vessel containing iodine crystals. Within a few minutes it takes
on a dark brown colour, and is then mounted in a saturated lævulose
solution, whose index of refraction is very high. To preserve these
specimens they must be surrounded with some kind of cover-glass cement.

By the use of better methods the red blood corpuscles which have taken
on the iodine stain stand out, without having undergone any
morphological change. The white blood corpuscles are only slightly
stained. All parts containing glycogen on the contrary, whether the
glycogen be in the white blood corpuscles, or extracellular, are
characterised by a beautiful mahogany brown colour. The second
modification of this method is specially to be recommended on account of
the strong clearing action of the lævulose syrup. In using the
iodine-indiarubber solution a small quantity of glycogen in the cells
may escape observation owing to the opaqueness of the indiarubber, and
occasionally too by the separate staining of the same. The second more
delicate method is for this reason recommended, in the investigation of
cases of diabetes and other diseases[7].

2. The microscopic test of the distribution of alkali in the blood.

These methods rest on a procedure of Mylius for the estimation of the
amount of alkali in glass. Iodine-eosine is a red compound easily
soluble in water, which is not soluble in ether, chloroform, or toluol.
But the free coloured acid, which is precipitated by acidifying
solutions of the salt, is very sparingly soluble in water. It is, on the
contrary, very easily soluble in organic solvents, so that by shaking,
it completely passes over into an etherial solution, which becomes
yellow. If this solution be allowed to fall on glass, on which deposits
of alkali have been formed by decomposition, they stand out in a fine
red colour as the result of the production of the deeply coloured salt.

In its application to the blood, of course the vessels used for staining
as well as the cover-glasses must be cleaned from all adhering traces of
alkali by means of acids. The dry specimen is thrown directly after its
preparation into a glass vessel containing a chloroform or
chloroform-toluol solution of free iodine-eosine. In a short time it
becomes dark red. It is then quickly transferred to another vessel
containing pure chloroform, which is once more changed, and the
preparation still wet from the chloroform is then mounted in canada
balsam. In such preparations the morphological elements have preserved
their shape completely. The plasma shews a distinct red colour, whilst
the red corpuscles have taken up no colour. The protoplasm of the white
corpuscles is red, the nuclei appear as spaces, because unstained
(=negative nuclear staining=). The disintegrated corpuscles and the fibrin
which is produced, shew an intense red stain. These stains are
peculiarly instructive, and shew many details which are not visible in
other methods. The study of these preparations is really of the highest
value, since they allow the products of manipulation of the dry
preparation and every error of production to stand out in the most
reliable manner, and so render possible a kind of automatic control. The
scientific value of this method lies in the fact that it throws light on
the distribution of the alkali in the individual elements of the blood.
It appears that free alkali reacting on iodine-eosine is not present in
the nuclei; these must therefore have a neutral or an acid reaction. On
the contrary the protoplasm of the leucocytes is always alkaline, and
the largest amount of alkali is held by the protoplasm of the
lymphocytes. We call particular attention, in this connection, to the
strong alkalinity of the blood platelets.

FOOTNOTES:

[4] Klönne and Müller, Berlin, supply these after Ehrlich's directions.

[5] Baden Anilin and Soda manufactory, Kalle and Co.

[6] At M. Heidenhain's instigation, the Anilin-dye Company of Berlin
have prepared the three dyes in the crystalline form.

[7] It may also be used for the recognition of glycogen in secretions.
For instance, gonorrhoeal pus always shews a considerable glycogen
reaction of the pus cells. It is found, moreover, in cells which
originate from tumours, whether these be present in exudations, or
obtained by scraping.




B. NORMAL AND PATHOLOGICAL HISTOLOGY OF THE BLOOD.


In satisfactorily prepared dry specimens =the red blood corpuscles= keep
their natural size and shape, and their biconcavity is plainly seen.
They present a distinct round homogeneous form, of about 7.5 µ in
diameter. They are most intensely coloured in a broad peripheral layer,
and most faintly in the centre corresponding to their depression. With
all stains mentioned above the stroma is quite uncoloured, and the
hæmoglobin exclusively attracts the stain, so that for a practised
observer the depth of stain gives a certain indication of the hæmoglobin
equivalent of each cell, and a better one than the natural colour of the
hæmoglobin in the fresh specimen. Corpuscles poor in hæmoglobin are
easily recognised by their fainter staining, especially by the still
greater brightness of the central zone. When somewhat more marked, they
present appearances which from the isolated staining of the periphery
Litten has happily named "pessary" forms. The faint staining of a red
corpuscle cannot be explained, as E. Grawitz assumes, by a diminished
affinity of the hæmoglobin for the dye. Qualitative changes of this kind
of the hæmoglobin, expressing themselves in an altered relationship
towards dyes, do not occur, even in anæmic blood. If in the latter, the
blood discs stain less intensely, this is due exclusively to the smaller
amount of hæmoglobin.

A diminution in the hæmoglobin content can in this way be shewn in all
anæmic conditions, especially in posthæmorrhagic, secondary and
chlorotic cases. On the contrary, as Laache first observed, in the
pernicious anæmias, the hæmoglobin equivalent of the individual discs is
raised.

To appreciate correctly pathological conditions, it must always be borne
in mind, that in normal blood the individual red blood corpuscles are by
no means of the same value. Step by step some of the cells are used up
and replaced by new. Every drop of blood contains, side by side, the
most various stages of life of fully formed erythrocytes. For this
reason influences which affect the blood--provided their intensity does
not exceed a certain degree--cannot equally influence all red
corpuscles. The least resistant elements, that is, the oldest, will
succumb to the effect of influences, to which other and more vigorous
cells adapt themselves.

To influences, of this moderate degree, belongs without doubt the anæmic
constitution of the blood as such, the effect of which in this direction
one can best investigate in cases of posthæmorrhagic anæmia.

In all anæmic conditions we observe characteristic changes in the blood
discs.


A. =Anæmic or polychromatophil degeneration.=

This change in the red blood corpuscles, first described by Ehrlich, to
which the second name was given later by Gabritschewski, is =only
recognisable in stained preparations=. The red blood discs, which under
normal circumstances stain in pure hæmoglobin colour, now take on a
mixed colour. For instance, the red corpuscles are pure red in
preparations of normal blood, stained with hæmatoxylin-eosine mixture.
But in preparations of blood of a chromic anæmia stained with the same
solution, in which possibly all stages of the degeneration in question
are present, one sees red discs with a faint inclination to violet;
others which are bluish red; and at the end of the series, forms stained
a fairly intense blue, in which scarcely a trace of red can be seen, and
which by their peculiar notched periphery are evidently to be regarded
as dying elements.

Ehrlich put forward the theory, that this remarkable behaviour towards
dyes indicates a gradual death of the red blood corpuscles, that is of
the old forms, leading to a coagulation necrosis of the discoplasm. The
latter takes up, as is the case in coagulation necrosis, the proteids of
the blood, and acquires thereby the power of combining with nuclear
stains. At the same time the discoplasm loses its power of retaining the
hæmoglobin, and gives it up to the blood plasma in ever increasing
quantity as the change proceeds. Hence the disc continues to lose the
capacity for the specific hæmoglobin stain.

Objection has been raised to these views from many quarters, especially
from Gabritschewski, and afterwards from Askanazy, Dunin and others. The
polychromatophil discs are not, they say, dying forms, but on the
contrary represent young individuals. The circumstance, that in certain
anæmias the early stages of the nucleated red corpuscles are variously
polychromatic, was evidence for this opinion.

In view of the great theoretical importance which attaches to this
subject, the grounds for regarding this change as degenerative, may be
here shortly brought forward.

1. The appearance of the erythrocytes which shew polychromatophilia in
the highest degree. By the notching of their margins they appear to eyes
practised in the judgment of morphological conditions, in a stage almost
of dissolution, and as well-pronounced degeneration forms.

2. The fact that by animal experiment, for instance, in inanition, their
appearance in large numbers in the blood can be produced. That is,
precisely in conditions, where there can be least question of a fresh
production of red blood corpuscles.

3. The clinical experience, that in acute losses of blood in man, these
staining anomalies, can be observed in numerous cells, within so short a
time as the first 24 hours. Whilst in our observations, which are very
numerous upon this point, embracing several hundred cases, and carried
out with particular care, no nucleated red blood corpuscles in this
space of time can be found in man[8].

4. The polychromatophil degeneration can frequently be observed in
nucleated red blood corpuscles, particularly in the megaloblasts. This
fact can be so easily established that it can hardly escape even an
unpractised observer, and it was sufficiently familiar to Ehrlich, who
first directed attention to these conditions. The fact that the
normoblasts, which are typical of normal regeneration, are as a rule
free from polychromatophil degeneration, gave the key for the
interpretation of this appearance. And similarly for the nucleated red
blood corpuscles of lower animals. Askanazy asserts that the nucleated
red blood corpuscles of the bone-marrow, which he was able to
investigate in a case of empyema, shew, immediately after the resection
of the ribs, complete polychromatophilia. This perhaps depends on the
peculiarities of the case, or on the uncertainty of the staining method:
eosine-methylene blue stain, which is for this purpose very unreliable,
since slight overstaining towards blue readily occurs. (We expressly
advise the use of the triacid solution or of the hæmatoxylin-eosine
mixture for the study of the anæmic degenerations.)

After what has been adduced, we hold in agreement with the recent work
of Pappenheim, and Maragliano, that the appearance of polychromatophilia
is a sign of degeneration. To explain the presence of erythroblasts
which have undergone these changes we must suppose that in severe
injuries to the life of the blood these elements are not produced in the
usual fashion, but from the very beginning are morbidly altered.
Analogies from general pathology suggest themselves in sufficient
number.


B. A second change that we find in the red blood corpuscles of the
anæmias, is =poikilocytosis=.

By this name a change of the blood is denoted, where along with normal
red blood corpuscles, larger, smaller and minute red elements are found
in greater or less number. The excessively large cells are found in
pernicious anæmia, as Laache first observed, and as has since been
generally confirmed. On the contrary in all other severe or moderate
anæmic conditions, the red corpuscles shew a diminution in volume, and
in their amount of hæmoglobin. This contradiction, which Laache first
mentioned, but was unable to explain, has found a satisfactory solution
in Ehrlich's researches on the nucleated precursors of the myelocytes
and normocytes (see below).

The blood picture of the anæmias is made still more complicated in that
the diminutive cells do not preserve their normal shape, but assume the
well-known irregular forms: pear-, balloon-, saucer-, canoe-shapes.
Nevertheless in good dry preparations the smallest forms usually still
shew the central depression. The so-called "microcytes" constitute an
exception to this statement. These are small round forms, to which was
allotted in the early days of the microscopic investigation of the
blood, a special significance for the severe anæmias. They are however
nothing but contraction forms of the poikilocytes, as the crenated are
of the normal corpuscles. Consequently microcytes are but seldom found
in dried specimens, whilst in wet preparations they are easily seen
after some time. It is further of importance to know, that in fresh
blood the poikilocytes exhibit certain movements, which have already
given rise to mistakes in many ways. Thus at one time the poikilocytes
were considered to be the cause of malaria. More recently the somewhat
larger sizes were regarded by Klebs, Perles as amoebæ and similar
organisms. In agreement with Hayem, who from the very first described
these forms as =pseudo-parasites=, a warning must be given against
attributing a parasitic character to them.

The origin of poikilocytosis, previously the subject of much
discussion, is now generally explained in Ehrlich's way. For the mere
fact, that by careful heating, poikilocytosis can be experimentally
produced in any blood, forces one to the assumption that the
poikilocytes are products of a fragmentation of the red blood corpuscles
("schistocytes," Ehrlich). And correspondingly the smallest fragments
shew the biconcave form in the dry specimen; for they too contain the
specific protoplasm of the disc "which possesses the inherent tendency
to assume the typical biconcave form in a state of equilibrium."

blood in leukæmia. No =diagnostic= importance of any kind can however be
ascribed to them. They are found in all cases only in very small
numbers. Thus Müller says that he generally must look through many
thousands of white cells before meeting one mitosis. Only in one case
did he find the figures of nuclear division somewhat more abundant,
where there was one mitosis only to several hundreds of leucocytes.

These really negative observations shew that the mitoses play a
completely negligeable part in the increase of the cells in the blood
itself. For the diagnosis of leukæmia they are valueless.

6. =Nucleated red corpuscles= form a constant constituent of leukæmic
blood. In different cases their number is very varying; in one case they
occur extremely sparingly, in another every field contains very many.
The normoblastic type is found most frequently, but side by side with
it, megaloblasts and forms transitional between the two are occasionally
found. Mitoses within the red blood discs have been described by
different authors, but possess no theoretic or clinical importance. The
appearance of erythroblasts in leukæmia may be either a specific
phenomenon, or merely the expression of an anæmia accompanying the
leukæmia. We are inclined to the first supposition, since the occurrence
in such numbers of nucleated red cells is hardly ever observed in other
anæmias of the same severity.

So much for the characteristics of leukæmic blood, upon which the
diagnosis of the disease is made. We must add that although in any case
of medullary leukæmia each particular factor described is to be
recognised, yet the manner of its appearance, its numerical relation to
the others and to the total blood varies extremely. Apart from the
degree of increase of the leucocytes, no one case is the same as another
with regard to the other anomalies. In one case the blood bears a
large-celled, mononuclear neutrophil character; in another the increase
of the eosinophil cells predominates; in a third the nucleated red blood
corpuscles preponderate; in a fourth we see a flooding of the blood with
mast cells. And hence results a multiplicity of combinations, and each
single case has its own individual features[34].

       *       *       *       *       *

It is of special importance to study the changes due to certain
intercurrent diseases in the blood picture of medullary leukæmia. This
point has recently been the object of detailed investigation, in
particular by A. Fraenkel, Lichtheim and others[35]. According to these
authors, under the influence of febrile diseases the total number of
leucocytes may be enormously decreased. The blood moreover is altered,
so that the myelæmic characteristics become less marked, and the
polynuclear neutrophil elements largely preponderate. The latter may
attain the percentage numbers of common leucocytosis up to 90% and
over.

We will here mention a few rare cases, demanding special attention,
shewing the alterations leukæmic blood may undergo, and occasionally
presenting almost insuperable difficulties in diagnosis. We find but a
single case of this kind mentioned in the literature. Zappert reported a
patient, who in February, 1892, had shewn the typical signs of
myelogenic leukæmia. Amongst others the relation of white to red cells
was found to be 1:4.92, and 1400 eosinophil cells per mm.^{3} (3.4%)
were counted. At the end of September of the same year the patient was
brought in a miserable condition to the hospital, where she soon died
with gradually failing strength. During this period of observation the
proportion of white to red was 1:1.5; the percentage of eosinophils,
0.43; the mononuclears, most of which had no neutrophil granulation,
amounted to 70% of the leucocytes. Zappert expressly mentions that these
mononuclear cells were in no way similar to the lymphocytes in general
appearance. At the autopsy Zappert found the bone-marrow studded with
non-granulated mononuclear cells, and the eosinophil cells were much
more scanty than is usually the case in leukæmic bone-marrow.
Blachstein, under Ehrlich's direction, investigated a second case of
this kind. This patient had also been the subject of exact clinical
investigations for some time on account of a myelogenic leukæmia. During
the time he was last in hospital the blood could only be examined a day
before the fatal termination, the direct consequence of a septic
complication. With a markedly leukæmic constitution of the blood there
were found 62% polynuclear cells, 17.5% mononuclear about the size of
the ordinary myelocyte, 0.75% eosinophil cells, nucleated red blood
corpuscles in moderate amount. The preponderance of polynuclear and the
small number of eosinophil cells is readily explainable from the septic
infection; on the other hand the absence of granules in the mononuclear
cells is most surprising.

These two observations can only be interpreted by assuming a loss, in
certain terminal stages, on the part of the organism, of its power of
forming neutrophil substances. Similar conditions occur in non-leukæmic
conditions; for example in a striking case of posthæmorrhagic anæmia
described by Ehrlich. It is of great importance to direct attention to
these cases, which up to the present have been practically
disregarded--for ignorance of their occurrence may easily give rise to
gross errors concerning the nature and origin of the mononuclear cells,
and to the manufacture of a lienal form of leukæmia.

       *       *       *       *       *

Finally we have to discuss the important question, how ~the origin of
myelæmic blood~ is to be explained. According to our conceptions two
possibilities come under consideration. Either we have to deal with a
passive inflow of bone-marrow elements, or with an active emigration
from the bone-marrow into the circulation. This important and difficult
question is certainly not fully ripe for discussion. The most weighty
objection to be raised against an active emigration of the bone-marrow
cells is derived from the behaviour of the white blood corpuscles on the
warm microscopic stage. These investigations have been performed by a
number of authors of whom may be mentioned Biesiadecki, Neumann, Hayem,
Löwit, Mayet, Gilbert, and particularly H. F. Müller on the ground of
his summary of this subject. Concerning the behaviour of the forms of
cell here involved, all authors are agreed that under no conditions do
the lymphocytes shew the smallest spontaneous movement; whilst the
polynuclear neutrophil cells always exhibit vigorous contractility. With
regard to the forms most characteristic of leukæmic blood the statements
are partially contradictory. Some authors deny all spontaneous movement
of these cells; but most of them report observations from which it
follows that a certain power of spontaneous movement is not to be
gainsaid. It will be admitted that in questions of this kind, negative
results are weakened by positive data. Thus Jolly recently described
similar observations as follows: "C'étaient des changements de forme sur
place, lents et peu considérables, formations de bosselures à grands
rayons, passage d'une forme arrondie à une forme ovulaire ou bilobée
etc. Ces mouvements étaient visibles dans les observations I et IV et
appartenaient surtout à des globules de grande taille." It is naturally
impossible to decide if these minute movements suffice for a spontaneous
locomotion. But one cannot exclude off-hand the supposition that they
do. It is indeed supported by a further observation of Jolly on the
mononuclear eosinophil cells of the marrow. Hitherto it was taken for
established that these cells are completely devoid of spontaneous
movement. Jolly however was recently able to examine a specimen from a
case of typical leukæmia, =in which nearly all the eosinophil cells
shewed active movement=. He says: "Ces globules granuleux actifs
présentaient des mouvements de progression et des changements de forme
caractéristiques et rapides; cependant je n'ai pas vu ces globules
présenter de pseudopodes effilés; de plus, leurs contours restaient
presque toujours assez nettement arrêtés. Ces particularités
correspondent exactement à la description, qu'a donnée depuis longtemps
Max Schultze des mouvements des cellules granuleuses du sang normal."
Examination of dry specimens from the same case shewed, as Jolly
expressly mentioned, that the blood contained, as leukæmic blood always
does, polynuclear and mononuclear eosinophil cells. In contrast then
with all earlier observations, Jolly has demonstrated an active
spontaneous movement of the mononuclear eosinophil cells. The amoeboid
movement of the mononuclear cells is so seldom seen, not because they
lack this function, but obviously from defects in the methods of
investigation, which as is manifest are rather rough and wholly unsuited
for delicate biological processes. There are many instances in the
literature of the failures of this method, even in the case of cells
with undisputed mobility. Thus Rieder failed to observe any
contractility in the majority of polynuclear leucocytes in a case of
malignant lymphoma, whereas according to all other observations they
possess this property without exception.

We think then we must draw the conclusion that the feeble mobility of
the mononuclear cells, both eosinophilous and polynuclear, is only
apparent, and is owing to the gross method of investigation. In reality
they doubtless have mobility sufficient for emigration.

A further, but much less weighty objection to the view that myelogenic
leukæmia is an active leucocytosis is, that pus artificially produced in
leukæmic patients has nearly always the histological constitution of
normal pus. But from our previous detailed remarks we should only expect
a myelæmic constitution of the pus, if the specific morbid agent of
leukæmia were present in a concentrated form at the place of
inflammation. Just as we saw in pemphigus, Neusser's eosinophilous
suppuration occurred only in the specific pemphigus bullæ, but not in
the foci of suppuration that were artificially produced. We know that
the myelocytes are in no way positively influenced by the chemiotactic
stimuli of ordinary infectious agents. On the contrary, it clearly
follows from the above-mentioned observations on the transformation of
leukæmic blood under the influence of infectious diseases, that the
common bacterial poisons act in a negatively chemiotactic sense, both on
the eosinophil and on the neutrophil mononuclear cells. Under these
circumstances we should indeed expect that artificially produced
suppuration in leukæmic patients would have, not a myelæmic, but a
polynuclear neutrophil character.

It will be the task of further investigations to examine accurately
inflammatory products, _e.g._ pleuritic exudations, in leukæmic
patients, with the object of elucidating the question, whether under
special conditions of disease all the leucocytes characteristic for
leukæmia may not be able to wander from the blood. Thus in a case of
pleurisy in a leukæmic patient, Ehrlich received the impression from the
preparations that a "myeloid" emigration had in fact occurred, carrying
all the elements in the blood into the exudation. This observation does
not prove the point, for numerical estimation of the proportion of white
to red blood corpuscles in the exudation was not made. And these
estimations are necessary in order to prove indisputably the active
emigration of the white blood corpuscles into the exudation, and to
exclude their purely mechanical passage, _per rhexin_, from the
blood-stream.

The hypothesis of the active origin of myelæmia is considerably
supported by a further train of argument. In leukæmia, besides the
myelocytes, the polynuclear leucocytes are also enormously increased,
and their active emigration is beyond doubt. And the view, that the
mononuclear cells are washed into the blood, excludes that of a single
mode of origin of the leukæmic blood condition; and commits us to a
highly artificial explanation of its production.

The morphological changes of leukæmic blood under the influence of
infectious diseases can only be explained from the standpoint of the
emigration theory. For if the white blood corpuscles were mechanically
carried out of the bone-marrow as a whole, it is incomprehensible that a
bacterial infection should alter this process to a polynuclear
leucocytosis. This change of character is easily explained on the other
hand, as we have above shewn more in detail, by the assumption that
ordinary bacterial poisons act positively chemiotactically only on the
polynuclear neutrophil cells, but negatively on the other forms.

=We explain the origin of leukæmic blood by the emigration into the blood
under the influence of the specific leukæmic agent, not only of the
formed polynuclear elements, but also of their mononuclear, eosinophil
and neutrophil early stages; and to classify myelogenic leukæmia with
the active leucocytoses.=

FOOTNOTES:

[25] Naturally an ordinary leucocytosis may be combined with a
lymphæmia. We have already mentioned elsewhere (see page 102) that in
the leucocytosis of digestion or of diseases of the intestine in
children, such a coincidence occurs.

[26] The so-called agony leucocytosis we do not regard as a true
leucocytosis, but only as the expression of a stoppage of the
circulation caused by that condition. This produces an accumulation of
the white corpuscles on the vessel walls, especially in the peripheral
parts of the body which are as a rule used for clinical investigation. A
leucocytosis is thus simulated.

[27] It is also of interest to notice the behaviour of the eosinophil
cells in the passive form of leucocytosis, lymphæmia. _À priori_ both
conditions could be combined. As C. S. Engel has established in the
congenital syphilis of children a simultaneous marked increase of
lymphocytes and eosinophil cells is found. The lymphocytosis in these
cases is probably due to the anatomical changes of the lymph glands, and
the eosinophilia to specific chemiotactic attraction.

[28] In his monograph on Bothriocephalus anæmia Schauman, with reference
to the behaviour of the eosinophil cells, states that he has found them
in but few cases of this disease.

[29] This view has lately received striking confirmation from the
interesting experiment of Bäumer, who produced on himself by means of
continued stimulation with _Urticaria ureus_ a considerable increase in
four days of the mast cells in the irritated portions of the skin.

[30] That a well-marked basophil leucocytosis has not so far been
observed may be thus explained. The substances which attract the mast
cells are very rarely produced in the body; much more seldom than the
corresponding substances attractive for the eosinophils. In morbid
conditions, where substances attracting the mast cells were present, it
might be possible to find a suppuration of mast cells, or a mast cell
leucocytosis as well. In this connection an observation of Albert
Neisser is of the greatest interest. He met with (private communication)
one, out of numberless cases of gonorrhoea, in which the purulent
secretion consisted entirely of mast cells.

[31] Unger has recently published completely analogous observations on
the human breast for the mast cells. Under the influence of stagnation
of the milk he saw an invasion of the gland tissue by typical mast
cells.

[32] A very interesting observation of Goldmann's deserves mention here.
Goldmann found in preparations of the pancreas of proteus sanguineus,
containing parasites, that the eosinophil cells in the neighbourhood of
the encapsuled parasites were much increased, whereas they were sought
for in vain, in more distant parts.

[33] A case observed some time back by Ehrlich may here be mentioned as
a characteristic example. A woman received a blow in the region of the
spleen by a fall from the roof, which gradually led to a marked splenic
enlargement. As no other symptoms appeared, the surgeon in charge
proposed splenectomy, on the assumption of a pure splenic leukæmia.
Examination of the blood, however, shewed a condition fully
corresponding with myelogenic leukæmia, and thus prevented surgical
interference.

[34] Ehrlich was once able to recognise, by balancing the different
forms of cells, the blood preparations after the loss of their labels
from some ten cases of leukæmia.

[35] Literature given by A. Fraenkel.




V. DIMINUTION OF THE WHITE BLOOD CORPUSCLES (LEUKOPENIA).


Diminution of the white blood corpuscles plays--comparatively with their
increase--a very unimportant _rôle_ in clinical observations. It occurs
in but few groups of diseases, and but seldom attains a marked degree.
Koblanck has described a most marked fall in the number of the
colourless cells, in the following remarkable blood condition. In a
strong man, 25 years of age, whose internal organs were found to be
healthy, short epileptiform attacks occurred, in one of which death took
place. The autopsy gave no indication of the cause of death. Two
examinations of the blood were made in the course of the three days he
was under observation. In one of these, out of =ten cover-glass
preparations, not a single white blood corpuscle was found=, and in the
second only one example.

We have mentioned this case here, because it is remarkable as an extreme
leukopenia never before observed. An explanation however is impossible
owing to the obscurity of the general clinical condition.

For the rest the conditions, under which a considerable diminution of
the leucocytes occurs, are very well-known. We distinguish two chief
groups:

1. Leukopenia from =destruction of a portion of the white blood
corpuscles= (Löwit);

2. Leukopenia from =deficient inflow of white corpuscles=:

[alpha]. in infectious diseases from =negative chemiotaxis=;

[beta]. in anæmia etc. from =defective action of the bone-marrow=.

We have entered more fully into the leukopenia experimentally produced
by Löwit, in the chapter on leucocytosis. We there explained, that
according to present views, we have to deal, not with an actual
destruction of the white elements, but merely with an altered
distribution within the blood-stream.

Amongst the infectious diseases where an hypoleucocytosis occurs,
typhoid fever must first be mentioned. The diminution is chiefly at the
expense of the polynuclear cells. Uncomplicated measles too, generally
runs its course with a marked leukopenia, specially distinct during the
breaking out and at the height of the exanthem. These cases of
infectious leukopenia are to be explained, not by a destruction of white
corpuscles, but rather by a diminished inflow, brought about by the
circulation of substances negatively chemiotactic for the polynuclear
elements.

Leukopenia has still another meaning in certain cases of severe anæmia,
where it indicates a highly unfavourable prognosis. Ehrlich has
described (_Charité Annalen_ 1888) a case of posthæmorrhagic anæmia
ending fatally, where an extreme diminution of the leucocytes occurred.
Exact figures shewed that the greater proportion (80%) of white blood
corpuscles consisted of lymphocytes, whilst the polynuclears amounted to
14% (instead of 70-72% normally). Eosinophil cells and nucleated red
blood corpuscles were entirely absent. Ehrlich explained these phenomena
by a deficient activity of the bone-marrow, which found expression in
the insufficient formation of red and white blood corpuscles. As the
anatomical basis of this deficient activity, he conjectured that in this
case the fatty marrow of the big long bones could not have been changed
to blood forming red marrow, as is the rule in severe anæmias. In two
cases the autopsy fully confirmed this diagnosis made during life.


The blood platelets.--The hæmoconiæ.

The ~blood-platelets~ were first described by Hayem, later by Bizzozero,
as a third formed element of normal blood. They are roundish or oval
discs free from hæmoglobin. They are extremely unstable under
mechanical, thermal, and chemical influences. Their size amounts to some
3 µ. Specially characteristic is their tendency, the result of their
extraordinary stickiness, to run together into largish clumps, "grape
clusters." This circumstance greatly facilitates the distinction of the
blood platelets from the other formed elements, but renders their
enumeration most difficult. The apparatus usually used for counting the
blood corpuscles is, for this reason, deceptive; for the platelets
rapidly cling to its walls and remain there. All early authors (_e.g._
Bizzozero) endeavoured to obviate this error by some particular diluting
fluid; but a number of these elements still remained fastened to the
walls of the capillary tube of the mixing apparatus.

Recently Brodie and Russell have recommended a new mixture in which the
platelets remain quite isolated, and are stained at the same time. They
allow the drop of blood as it comes from the puncture to enter a drop of
the fluid, and then estimate the relative proportion of red blood
corpuscles to platelets[36]. The prescription for their solution is as
follows:

     Dahlia-glycerin,
     2% solution of common salt ... equal parts.

Another method, used by the majority of more recent authors, is the
relative enumeration of blood platelets in the stain dry specimen.
Ehrlich found that the blood platelets were picked out by their deep red
colour, corresponding to the amount of alkali they contain, in
preparations treated by the iodine eosine method (see p. 46). Rabl's new
method is much more complicated and in no way more serviceable,
depending on a stain with iron hæmatoxylin recommended by E. Haidenhain
for demonstration of the centrosomes. A process of Rosin's, not yet
published, is more convenient. It consists in fixing the dry preparation
for 20 minutes in osmic acid vapour, and staining in a concentrated
watery solution of methylene blue.

       *       *       *       *       *

With regard to the significance of the blood platelets, most authors, of
whom we should before all mention Hayem, Bizzozero, Laker, assume
justifiably that they are preformed in the living blood. The view
opposed to this, advocated more particularly by Löwit, that these forms
first arise in the blood after it has left the vessels, we may describe
on the grounds of our own extensive observations as inaccurate.

The blood platelets, on the grounds of their small size and complete
lack of nuclear substance, are generally regarded as not analogous to
real cells. Whether they represent intravital precipitation of
substances of the plasma, or whether they are budded off from the cells,
cannot at the present be decided with certainty, though many facts seem
to support the latter assumption. That they contain glycogen (see p.
45), marks them as descendants of the blood cells. Moreover, appearances
are often met with in dry preparations that arouse the suspicion that
the platelets arise from the red blood corpuscles (Koeppe). Arnold has
further observed processes of budding in the red blood corpuscles not
only extravascularly but also intravascularly in the mesentery of young
guinea-pigs, and has seen the elements that were cut off change into
forms free from hæmoglobin.

Our knowledge too of the physiological function of the blood platelets
still needs much amplification. The original view of Hayem, who regards
the blood platelets as early stages of the red blood discs, and for this
reason calls them "hæmatoblasts," is, according to the judgment of most
hæmatologists, untenable.

Nearly all more recent papers, on the other hand (cp. Löwit's
compilation), recognise the =close connection of the blood platelets with
coagulation=, first observed by Bizzozero. Whether the substance of the
platelets directly yields the material for fibrin formation, as
Bizzozero holds, or whether according to the observations on thrombus
production of Eberth and Schimmelbusch they play but a subordinate part,
is not yet decided. To enter here into the chemical side of this
complicated problem, would lead us much too far, and we will only refer
to a few clinical observations which illustrate the relations between
the clotting power of the blood and the number of platelets it contains.

Marked =increase of the blood platelets= occurs in chlorosis (Muir) and in
posthæmorrhagic anæmia (Hayem). In both conditions there is a decided
=increase in the clotting power of the blood=. In contrast, is the
important observation of Denys, who found in two cases of purpura, where
as is well-known the =clotting power of the blood is always much lowered=
or may even be entirely destroyed, only one morphological blood change,
a very marked =diminution of the blood platelets=. Ehrlich likewise had
occasion to examine a similar case, in which the blood platelets were
entirely absent.

       *       *       *       *       *

H. F. Müller has described a fourth formed constituent of the blood, and
given it the name of "=hæmoconiæ=" or "=blood atoms=," "blood dust." It is
found in the plasma of the blood as very small granule- or coccæ-like
colourless corpuscles, highly refractile, with a very active molecular
movement, which keep their shape under observation for a very long time
without any special precautions. According to Müller these bodies are
not blackened by osmic acid, and probably contain no fat; they seem to
have no connection with fibrin formation, as they always lie outside
the fibrin network. Müller found them in every normal blood, in varying
numbers however; much increased in a case of Morbus Addisonii;
diminished in hunger and cachexias.

More detailed observations are necessary to determine the chemical
nature of these forms. Experiments in this direction by extraction with
ether, or by the use of fat staining substances, alkanna, Soudan dye,
and comparative investigations on lipæmic blood should be successful.

FOOTNOTES:

[36] The physiological figures found by Brodie and Russell with the aid
of this method exceed considerably those of earlier authors. They found
a proportion of platelets to erythrocytes of 1:85 or an absolute number
of about 635,000 per mm.{^3}




LITERATURE[37].


~Altmann.~ Über die Elementarorganismen und ihre Beziehungen zu den
Zellen. _Leipzig_, 1 Aufl. 1890. 2 Aufl. 1894.

~Arnold.~ Zur Morphologie und Biologie des Knochenmarks. _Virchow's
Archiv_, Bd. 140.

---- Über die Herkunft der Blutplättchen. _Centralbl. f. allg.
Pathologie und path. Anat._ Bd. 8, 1897.

~Askanazy.~ Über einen interessanten Blutbefund bei rapid letal
verlaufender Anæmie. _Zeitschr. f. klin. Med._ 1893, Bd. 23.

---- Über Bothriocephalus-Anæmie, und die prognostische Bedeutung der
Megaloblasten in anæmischem Blut. _Zeitschr. f. klin. Med._ 1895, Bd.
27.

~Barker.~ On the presence of iron in the granules of the eosinophil
leucocytes. _Johns Hopkins Hosp. Bull._ no. 42, 1894.

~Bäumer.~ Beiträge zur Histologie der Urticaria simplex und pigmentosa,
mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der Bedeutung der Mastzellen für die
Pathogenese der Urticaria pigmentosa. _Inaugural Dissertation._
_Berlin_, 1895.

~Beck.~ Über Quecksilber-Exantheme. _Charité Ann._ Bd. 20.

~v. Beck.~ Subcutane Milzruptur, Milzexstirpation, Heilung. _Münch. Med.
Woch._ 1897, no. 47.

~Benario.~ Noch einmal die Leucocytenschatten Klein's. _Deutsche Med.
Woch._ 1894, no. 27.

~Biernacki.~ Untersuchungen über die chemische Beschaffenheit bei
pathologischen, insbesondere bei anæmischen Zuständen. _Zeitschr. f.
klin. Med._ 1894, vol. XXIV. (References to literature.)

~Bizzozero.~ Über die Bildung der roten Blutkörperchen. _Virchow's
Archiv_, 1884, vol. XCV.

---- Über einen neuen Formbestandtheil des Blutes, und dessen Rolle bei
der Thrombose and der Blutgerinnung. _Virchow's Archiv_, 1882, vol. XC.

~Bleibtreu, L.~ Kritisches über den Hæmatokrit. _Berl. klin. Woch._ 1893,
nos. 30, 31.

~Bleibtreu, M. und L.~ Eine Methode zur Bestimmung des Volums der
körperlichen Elemente im Blut. _Pflüger's Archiv_, 1892, vol. LI.

~Blix-Hedin.~ _Skandinavisches Archiv f. Path._ 1890 (quoted by Limbeck).

~Brodie and Russell.~ The enumeration of blood-platelets. _Journ. of
Physiology_, 1897, nos. 4 and 5.

~Brown, T. R.~ _Johns Hopkins Hosp. Bulletin_, 1897.

~Buchner.~ Untersuchungen über die bacterienfeindlichen Wirkungen des
Blutes and Blutserums. _Arch. f. Hygiene_, vol. X, 1890.

~Bücklers.~ Über den Zusammenhang der Vermehrung der eosinophilen Zellen
im Blute mit dem Vorkommen der Charcot'schen Krystalle in den Fæces bei
Wurmkranken. _Münch. Med. Woch._ nos. 2 and 3.

~Calleja.~ Distribución y Significación de las Células cebadas de Ehrlich.
_Rivista trimestr. micrográfica_, vol. I. 1896.

~Canon.~ Über eosinophilen Zellen and Mastzellen im Blut Gesunder und
Kranker. _Deutsche Med. Woch._ 1892, no. 10.

~Cohnheim.~ Vorlesungen über allgemeine Pathologie. I. and II. _Berlin_,
1877.

~Cohnstein und Zuntz.~ Untersuchungen über den Flüssigkeitsaustausch
zwischen Blut und Geweben unter verschiedenen physiologischen and
pathologischen Bedingungen. _Pflüger's Archiv_, 1888, vol. XLII.

~Credé.~ Über die Exstirpation der kranken Milz an Menschen. _Langenbech's
Archiv_, 1883, vol. XXXVIII. (Literature.)

~Czerny.~ Zur Kenntniss der glycogenen und amyloiden Entartung. _Arch. f.
exp. Path. und Pharm._ 1893, vol. XXXI.

~Denys.~ Un nouveau cas de Purpura avec diminution considérable des
plaquettes. Revue: _La Cellule_, vol. V. pt. 1.

~Dieballa.~ Über den Einfluss des Hæmoglobingehaltes und der Zahl der
Blutkörperchen auf das specifische Gewicht des Blutes bei Anæmischen.
_Deutsche Arch. f. klin. Med._ 1896, vol. LVII.

~Dock.~ Zur Morphologie des leukæmischen Blutes. _Moscow Internat.
Congress_, 1897.

~Dunin.~ Über anæmische Zustände. Leipzig, 1895. _Volkmann's Sammlung
klin. Vortrüge._ N.F. 135.

~Egger.~ Über die Untersuchung der Blutkörperchen beim Aufenthalt im
Hochgehirge. _Correspondenzbl. f. Schweizer Ärzte_, 1892, vol. XXXII.
_Congress f. innere Med._ 1893, vol. XII.

~Ehrlich.~ Farbenanalytische Untersuchungen zur Histologie and Klinik des
Blutes. _Berlin_, 1891.

---- Beiträge zur Ätiologie und Histologie pleuritischer Exsudate.
_Charité Ann._ 1880, vol. 7.

---- Zur Kenntniss des acuten Milztumors. _Charité Ann._ 1882, vol. IX.

---- Über schwere anæmische Zustände. _XI. Congress f. inn. Med._ 1892.

---- De- und Regeneration roter Blutscheiben. _Verhandl. d. Gesellsch.
d. Charité Ärzte_, June 10 and Dec. 9, 1880.

---- ~und Frerichs.~ Über das Vorkommen von Glycogen im diabetischen und
im normalen Organismus. _Zeitschr. f. klin. Med._ 1883, vol. 7.

~Einhorn.~ Über das Verhalten der Lymphocyten zu den weissen
Blutkörperchen. _Inaugural Dissertation._ _Berlin_, 1884.

~Elze.~ Das Wesen der Rhachitis und Scrophulose und deren Bekämpfung.
_Berlin_, 1897.

~Engel, C. S.~ Hæmatologischer Beitrag zur Prognose der Diphtherie.
_Verhandl. d. Vereins f. inn. Med. zu Berlin_, 1896, 1897.

---- Über verschiedene Formen der Leucocytose bei Kindern. _XV. Congr.
f. inn. Med._ 1897.

~Epstein, J.~ Blutbefunde bei metastatischer Carcinose des Knochenmarks.
_Zeitschr. f. klin. Med._ 1896, vol. XXX.

~Eykmann.~ Blutuntersuchungen in den Tropen. _Virchow's Archiv_, vol.
CXXVI.

~Fano.~ Quoted by ~v. Limbeck~.

~Fischer, A.~ Untersuchungen über den Bau der Cyanophyceen und Bacterien.
_Jena_, 1897.

~Fraenkel, A.~ Über acute Leukæmie. _Deutsche Med. Woch._ 1895, nos.
39-43.

---- ~und Benda, C.~ Klinische Mittheilungen über acute Leukæmie. _XV.
Congr. f. inn. Med._ 1897.

~Frerichs.~ Über den plötzlichen Tod and über das Coma bei Diabetes.
_Zeitschr. f. klin. Med._ 1883, vol. VI.

~Gabbi.~ Die Blutveränderungen nach Exstirpation der Milz, in Beziehung
zur hæmolytischen Function der Milz. _Ziegler's Beiträge zur path.
Anat._ vol. XIX. pt. 3.

~Gabritschewsky.~ Klinisch-hæmatologische Notizen. _Arch. f. exp. Path. u.
Pharm._ 1891, vol. XXVIII.

---- Mikroscopische Untersuchungen über Glycogenreaction im Blut. _Arch.
f. exp. Path. u. Pharm._ 1891, vol. XXVIII.

~Gärtner, C.~ Über eine Verbesserung des Hæmokrit. _Berl. klin. Woch._
1892, no. 36.

~Glogner.~ Über das specifische Gewicht des Blutes des in den Tropen
lebenden Europæers. _Virchow's Archiv_, vol. CXXVI.

~Goldberger und Weiss, F.~ Die Jodreaction im Blut und ihre diagnostische
Verwertung in der Chirugie. _Wiener klin. Woch._ 1897.

~Goldmann.~ Beitrag zu der Lehre von dem "malignen Lymphom." _Centralbl.
f. allgem. Path. u. path. Anat._ 1892, vol. III.

~Goldscheider und Jakob~. Über die Variationen der Leucocytose
(Literature). _Zeitschr. f. klin. Med._ vol. XXV. 1894.

~Gollasch.~ Zur Kenntniss des asthmatischen Sputums. _Fortschritte d.
Med._ 1889, vol. VII.

~Grawitz, E.~ Über die Einwirkung des Höhenklimas auf die Zusammensetzung
des Blutes. _Berl. klin. Woch._ 1895, Nos. 33, 34.

~Grawitz, E.~ Klinische Pathologie des Blutes. _Berlin_, 1896.

---- Über Blutbefunde bei Behandlung mit dem Koch'schen Mittel. _Charité
Ann._ 1891.

---- Klinisch-experimentelle Blutuntersuchungen. _Zeitschr. f. klin.
Med._ 1892, vols. XXI. XXII.

~Gulland.~ On the Granular Leucocytes. _Journ. of Physiol._ 1896, vol.
XIX.

~Hahn, M.~ Über die Beziehungen der Leucocyten zur bactericiden Wirkung
des Blutes. _Archiv f. Hygiene_, 1895, vol. XXV.

~Hammerschlag.~ Über das Verhalten des specifischen Gewichtes des Blutes
in Krankheiten. _Centralbl. f. klin. Med._ 1891, no. 44.

---- Über Hydræmie. _Zeitschr. f. klin. Med._ 1892, vol. XXI.

---- Über Blutbefunde bei Chlorose. _Wiener Med. Presse_, 1894, no. 27.

~Hankin, E. H.~ Über den Ursprung und das Vorkommen von Alexinen im
Organismus. _Centralbl. f. Bakt. u. Parasitenkunde_, 1892, vol. XII.

~Hardy, W. B.~ Wandering cells and bacilli. _Journ. of Physiol._ 1898.

---- Blood Corpuscles of Crustacea. _Journ. of Physiol._ 1892.

~Hartmann et Vaquez.~ Les modifications du sang après la splénectomie.
_Compt. rend. de la Société de Biologie._ Xth Series, vol. IV. 1897.

~Hayem.~ Du sang. _Paris_, 1889.

---- Du caillot non rétractile. Suppression de la formation du sérum
sanguin dans quelques états pathologiques. _Acad. des Sciences_, Nov.
1896. (Sem. médic.)

---- Des globules rouges à noyau dans le sang de l'adulte. _Arch. de
Phys. norm. et path._ IIIrd Series, vol. I. 1883.

~Herz, Max.~ Blutkrankheiten. _Virchow's Archiv_, vol. CXXXIII.

~Hirschfeld, H.~ Beiträge zur vergleichenden Morphologie der Leucocyten.
_Inaug. Dissert._ _Berlin_, 1897.

~Hoppe-Seyler.~ Verbesserte Methode der colorimetrischen Bestimmung des
Blutfarbstoffgehaltes im Blut und in anderen Flüssigkeiten. _Zeitschr.
f. phys. Chemie_, vol. XVI.

~Howell.~ The life-history of the formed elements of the blood. (Quoted by
~H. F. Müller~.)

~Israel, O. und Leyden.~ Demonstrationen in der Berliner medicinischen
Gesellschaft. _Berl. klin. Woch._ 1890, no. 40.

~Israel und Pappenheim.~ Über die Entkernung der Säugethiererythroblasten.
_Virchow's Archiv_, vol. CXLIII.

~Jadassohn.~ Demonstration von eosinophilen Zellen in Lupus und in anderen
Geweben. _Verhandl. d. deutschen dermatolog. Gesellsch._ II. and III.
Congress. (Quoted by ~H. F. Müller~, Asthma bronchiale).

~v. Jaksch.~ Über die prognostische Bedeutung der bei croupöser Pneumonie
auftretenden Leucocytose. _Centralbl. f. klin. Med._ 1892, no. 5.

~Janowski, W.~ Zur Morphologie des Eiters verschiedenen Ursprungs. _Arch.
f. Path. u. Pharm._ 1895, vol. XXXVI.

~v. Jaruntowski und Schröder, E.~ Über Blutveränderungen im Gebirge.
_Münch. Med. Woch._ 1894, no. 48.

~Jenner.~ A new preparation for rapidly fixing and staining blood.
_Lancet_, 1899.

~Jolly, M. J.~ Sur les mouvements amiboïdes des globules blancs du sang
dans la Leucémie. _Compt. rend. de la Soc. de Biolog._ X. Series, vol.
5, 1898.

~Jones, Wharton.~ _Philosophical Transactions_, 1846, vol. I.

~Kanter.~ Über das Vorkommen von eosinophilen Zellen in malignem Lymphom
und bei einigen anderen Lymphdrüsenerkrankungen. _Inaug. Dissert.
Breslau_, 1893.

~Kanthack and Hardy.~ The Morphology and Distribution of the wandering
cells of Mammalia. _Journ. of Physiol._ 1894.

---- On the Characters and Behaviour of the Wandering Cells of the Frog,
especially in relation to Micro-organisms. _Phil. Trans._ 1894.

~Kikodse.~ Die pathologische Anatomie des Blutes bei der croupösen
Pneumonie. _Inaug. Dissert._ (Russian). Reviewed in _Centralbl. f. allg.
Path. u. path. Anat._ 1891, no. 3.

~Klebs.~ Cp. _XI. Congr. f. inn. Med._ Discussion.

~Knoll.~ Über die Blutkörperchen bei wirbellosen Thieren. _Sitzungsber. d.
kais. Akademie d. Wissensch. in Wien._ Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftl.
Cl. 1893, vol. CII. Pt 6.

~Koblanck.~ Zur Kenntniss des Verhaltens der Blutkörperchen bei Anæmie,
unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der Leukæmie. _Inaug. Dissert._
_Berlin_, 1889.

~Koeppe.~ Über Blutuntersuchungen im Gebirge. _Congr. f. inn. Med._
1893, vol. XII.

---- Über Blutuntersuchungen in Reiboldsgrün. _Münch. Med. Woch._ 1895.

---- Über den Quellungsgrad der roten Blutscheiben durch äquimoleculare
Salzlösungen, und über den osmotischen Druck des Blutplasmas. _Arch. f.
Anat. u. Phys._ Phys. Abt. 1895.

~Kündig.~ Über die Veränderungen des Blutes im Hochgebirge bei Gesunden
und Lungenkranken. _Correspondenzbl. f. Schweiz. Ärzte_, 1897, 1 and 2.

~Laache.~ Die Anæmie. _Christiania_, 1883.

~Labadie-Lagrave.~ Traité des maladies du sang. _Paris_, 1893.

~Laker.~ Über eine neue klinische Blutuntersuchungs-methode. (Specifische
Resistenz der roten Blutkörperchen.) _Wiener med. Presse_, 1890, no. 35.

---- Die Blutscheiben sind constante Formelemente des normal
circulierenden Säugethierblutes. _Virchow's Archiv_, 1889, vol. CXVI.

~Landois, L.~ Lehrbuch der Physiologie des Menschen. _Wien u. Leipzig_,
1887.

~Lazarus, A.~ Blutbefund bei perniciöser Anæmie. _Verhandl. d. Vereins f.
inn. Med. Deutsche Med. Woch._ 1896, no. 23.

~Leredde et Perrin.~ Anatomie pathologique de la Dermatose de Dühring.
_Ann. de Dermat. et Syphilograph._ IIIrd Series, VI.

~Lewy, Benno.~ Über das Vorkommen der Charcot-Leyden'schen Krystalle in
Nasentumoren. _Berl. klin. Woch._ 1891, nos. 33 and 34.

~Leyden, E.~ Über eosinophile Zellen aus dem Sputum von Bronchialasthma.
_Deutsche Med. Woch._ 1891, no 38.

~Lichtheim.~ Leukæmie mit complicierender tuberculöser Infection. _Verein
f. wissenschaftl. Heilkunde zu Königsberg_, Feb. 1897.

~v. Limbeck.~ Grundriss einer klinischen Pathologie des Blutes. 2nd Ed.
_Jena_, 1896.

---- Über die durch Gallenstauung bewirkten Veränderungen des Blutes.
_Centralbl. f. inn. Med._ 1896, no. 33.

~Litten.~ Über einige Veränderungen roter Blutkörperchen. _Berl. klin.
Woch._ 1877, no. 1.

~Löwit.~ Die Blutplättchen, ihre anatomische und chemische Bedeutung.
Reviewed in Lubarsch-Ostertag's _Ergebn. d. allgem. Path. Wiesbaden_,
1897. (Literature.)

---- Protozoennachweis im Blute und in den Organen leukæmischer
Individuen. _Centralbl. f. Bakt._ 1898, vol. XXIII.

~Loewy, A.~ Über Veränderungen des Blutes durch thermische Einflüsse.
_Berl. klin. Woch._ 1896, no. 4.

---- ~und Richter, P. F.~ Über den Einfluss von Fieber und Leucocytose auf
den Verlauf von Infectionskrankheiten. _Deutsche Med. Woch._ 1895, no.
15.

---- ---- Zur Biologie der Leucocyten. _Virchow's Archiv_, 1898, vol.
CLI.

~Lyonnet.~ De la densité du sang. _Paris_, 1892.

~Maragliano.~ Beitrag zur Pathologie des Blutes. _XI. Congress f. inn.
Med._ 1892.

~Maxon.~ Untersuchungen über den Wasser- und den Eiweissgehalt beim
kranken Menschen. _Deutsches Archiv f. klin. Med._ 1894, vol. LIII.

~Mayer, Karl Hermann.~ Die Fehlerquellen der Hæmometer-Untersuchung (v.
Fleischl). _Deutsches Archiv f. klin. Med._ vol. LVII. (Abundant
references.)

~Mayer, S.~ Über die Wirkung der Farbstoffe Violett B. und Neutralroth.
_Sitzungsb. d. deutschen naturwissensch.-med. Vereins f. Böhmen._
_Lotos_, 1896, no. 2.

~Mendel, K.~ Ein Fall von myxoedematösem Cretinismus. _Berl. klin.
Woch._ 1896, no. 45.

~Menicanti.~ Über das specifische Gewicht des Blutes und dessen
Beziehungen zum Hæmoglobingehalt. _Deutsches Archiv f. klin. Med._ 1892,
vol. L.

~Mercier.~ Des modifications de nombre et de volume que subissent les
erythrocytes sous l'influence de l'altitude. _Arch. de Physiologie._ Vth
Series, VI. 1894.

~Meunier.~ De la leucocytose dans la coqueluche. _Compt. rend. de la Soc.
de Biologie._ Xth Series, V. 1898.

~Michælis, L.~ Beiträge zur Kenntniss der Milch-secretion. _Arch. f. mikr.
Anat. u. Entwicklungsgeschichte_, vol. LI. 1898.

---- Die vitale Färbung, eine Darstellungsmethode der Zellgranula.
_Arch. f. mikrosc. Anat. u. Entwicklungsgeschichte_, 1900.

~Miescher.~ Über die Beziehungen zwischen Meereshöhe und Beschaffenheit
des Blutes. _Correspbl. d. Schweiz. Ärzte_, 1892, 23.

~Mosler.~ Die Pathologie und Therapie der Leukæmie. _Berlin_, 1872.

~Muir, R.~ Contribution to the physiology and pathology of the blood.
_Journ. of Anat. and Phys._ vol. XXV. 1891.

~Müller, H. F.~ Die Morphologie des leukæmischen Blutes und ihre
Beziehungen zur Lehre von der Leukæmie (Summary). _Centralbl. f. allg.
Path. u. path. Anat._ vol. V. nos. 13 and 14.

---- Zur Leukæmie-Frage. _Deutsches Arch. f. klin. Med._ vol. XLVIII.

---- Über die atypische Blutbildung bei der progressiven perniciösen
Anæmie. _Deutsches Arch. f. klin. Med._ 1893, vol. LI.

---- Zur Lehre vom Asthma bronchiale. _Centralbl. f. allg. Path. u.
path. Anat._ 1893, vol. IV.

---- ~und Rieder.~ Über Vorkommen and klinische Bedeutung der eosinophilen
Zelle im circulierenden Blut des Menschen. _Deutsches Arch. f. klin.
Med._ vol. XLVIII.

---- ---- Über einen bisher nicht beachteten Formbestandtheil des
Blutes. _Centralbl. f. allg. Path. u. path. Anat._ 1896.

~Neumann, E.~ Über Blutregeneration und Blutbildung. _Zeitschr. f. klin.
Med._ 1881, vol. III.

---- Farblose Blut- und Eiterzellen. _Berl. klin. Woch._ 1878, no. 41.

~Neumann, E.~ Ein neuer Fall von Leukæmie mit Erkrankung des Knochenmarks.
_Arch. d. Heilkunde_, 1872, vol. XIII.

~Neusser.~ Über einen besonderen Blutbefund bei uratischer Diathese.
_Wien. klin. Woch._ 1894, no. 39.

---- Klinisch-hæmatologische Mittheilungen (Pemphigus). _Wien. klin.
Woch._ 1892, nos. 3 and 4.

~v. Noorden.~ Untersuchungen über schwere Anæmie. _Charité Ann._ 1889,
vol. XVI.

---- Beiträge zur Pathologie des Asthma bronchiale. _Zeitschr. f. klin.
Med._ vol. XX.

~Nothnagel.~ Lymphadenia ossium. _Internat. klin._ _Rundschau_, 1891.
(Quoted by ~Epstein~.)

~Pappenheim.~ Die Bildung der roten Blutscheiben. _Inaug. Dissert._
_Berlin_, 1895. (Ample references.)

---- Über Entwicklung und Ausbildung der Erythroblasten. _Deutsche Med.
Woch._ 1897, vol. XLVIII.

~Pée.~ Untersuchungen über Leucocytose. _Inaug. Dissert._ _Berlin_, 1890.

~Peiper.~ Zur Symptomatologie der tierischen Parasiten. _Deutsche Med.
Woch._ 1897, no. 48.

~Perles.~ Beobachtungen über perniciöse Anæmie. _Berl. klin. Woch._ 1893,
no. 40.

~Pfeiffer, Th.~ Über die Bleibtreu'sche Methode zur Bestimmung des Volums
der körperlichen Elemente im Blut und die Anwendbarkeit derselben auf
das Blut gesunder und kranker (insbesondere fiebernder) Menschen.
_Centralbl. f. inn. Med._ 1895, no. 4.

~Prowazek.~ Vitalfärbungen mit Neutralroth an Protozoën. _Zeitschr. f.
wissenschaftl. Zoolog._ 1897.

~Prus.~ Eine neue Form der Zellenartung. Secretorische fuchsinophile
Degeneration. _Centralbl. f. allg. Path. u. path. Anat._ 1895, vol. VI.

~Przesmycki.~ Über die intravitale Färbung des Kernes und des
Protoplasmas. _Biolog. Centralbl._ vol. XVII. nos. 9 and 10. (Extensive
bibliography on nuclear staining.)

~Pugliese.~ Über die physiologische Rolle der Riesenzellen. _Fortschr. d.
Med._ 1897, vol. XV. no. 19.

~Quincke.~ Weitere Beobachtungen über perniciöse Anæmie. _Deutsches Arch.
f. klin. Med._ vol. XX.

---- Zur Physiologie und Pathologie des Blutes. _Deutsches Arch. f.
klin. Med._ vol. XXIII.

---- Über Eisentherapie. _Volkmann's Sammlung klin. Vorträge._ N.F. 129.

~Rabl.~ Über eine elective Färbung der Blutplättchen in
Trocken-präparaten. _Wien. klin. Woch._ 1896, no. 46.

~Rählmann.~ Über einige Beziehungen der Netzhautcirculation zu allgemeinen
Störungen des Blutkreislaufes. _Virchow's Archiv_, vol. CII.

~Reinbach.~ Über das Verhalten der Leucocyten bei malignen Tumoren.
_Langenbech's Archiv_, 1893, vol. XLVI.

~Reinert.~ Die Zählung der roten Blutkörperchen. _Leipzig_, 1891.

~Ribbert.~ Beiträge zur Entzündung. _Virchow's Archiv_, 1897, vol. CL.

~Rieder.~ Atlas der klinischen Mikroscopie des Blutes. _Leipzig_, 1893.

---- Beiträge zur Kenntniss der Leucocytose (Literature). _Leipzig_,
1892.

~Rindfleisch.~ Über Knochenmark und Blutbildung. _Arch. f. mikr. Anat._
1880.

---- Über den Fehler der Blutkörperchenbildung bei der perniciösen
Anæmie. _Virchow's Archiv_, 1890, vol. CXXI.

~v. Roietzky.~ Contributions à l'étude de la fonction hæmatopoïétique de
moëlle osseuse. _Arch. des sciences biol. Pétersbourg_, 1877. T. V.

~Sadler.~ Klinische Untersuchungen über die Zahl der corpusculären
Elemente und den Hæmoglobingehalt des Blutes. (Quoted by ~Türk~.)
_Fortschr. d. Med._ 1892.

~Schauman.~ Zur Kenntniss der sogenannten Bothriocephalus-Anæmie.
_Berlin_, 1894.

---- und Rosenquist. Zur Frage über die Einwirkung des Höhenklimas auf
die Blutbeschaffenheit (Prelim. Comm.). _Congr. f. inn. Med._ 1896, no.
22.

~Schiff.~ Über das quantitative Verhalten der Blutkörperchen und des
Hæmoglobins bei neugeborenen Kindern und Säuglingen unter normalen und
pathologischen Verhältnissen. _Zeitschr. f. Heilkunde_, 1890, vol. II.

~Schimmelbusch.~ Die Blutplättchen und die Blutgerinnung. _Virchow's
Archiv_, 1885, vol. CI.

~Schmaltz.~ Die Untersuchung des specifischen Gewichtes des menschlichen
Blutes. _Deutsch. Arch. f. klin. Med._ 1891, vol. XLVII.

---- Die Pathologie des Blutes und der Blutkrankheiten. _Leipzig_, 1896.

~Schmidt, A.~ Demonstration mikroscopischer Präparate zur Pathologie des
Asthma. _Congr. f. inn. Med._

~Schultze, Max.~ Ein heizbarer Objecttisch und seine Verwendung bei
Untersuchung des Blutes. _Arch. f. mikr. Anat._ 1865, vol. I.

~Schultze, O.~ Die vitale Methylenblaureaction der Zellgranula. _Anatom._
_Anzeiger_, 1887.

~Schumburg and Zuntz, N.~ Zur Kenntniss der Einwirkungen des Hochgebirges
auf den menschlichen Organismus. _Pflüger's Archiv_, 1896, vol. LXIII.

~Seige.~ Über einen Fall von Ankylostomiasis. _Inaug. Dissert._ _Berlin_,
1892.

~Spilling.~ See ~Ehrlich~, Farbenanalytische Untersuchungen.

~Stiénon.~ Recherches sur la leucocytose dans la Pneumonie aigue.
_Bruxelles_, 1895.

---- De la leucocytose dans les maladies infectueuses. _Bruxelles_,
1896.

~Stierlin.~ Blutkörperchenzählung und Hæmoglobinbestimmung bei Kindern.
_Deutsches Arch. f. klin. Med._ 1889, vol. XLV.

~Stintzing und Gumprecht.~ Wassergehalt und Trockensubstanz des Blutes
beim gesunden und kranken Menschen. _Deutsches Arch. f. klin. Med._
1894, vol. XLIII.

~Tarchanoff, J. R.~ Die Bestimmung der Blutmenge am lebenden Menschen.
_Pflüger's Archiv_, vols. XXIII, XXIV.

~Teichmann.~ Mikroscopische Beiträge zur Lehre von der Fettresorption.
_Inaug. Dissert._ _Breslau_, 1891.

~Thoma und Lyon.~ Über die Methode der Blutzählung. _Virchow's Archiv_,
vol. LXXXIV.

~Troje.~ Über Leukæmie und Pseudoleukæmie. _Berl. klin. Woch._ 1892, no.
12.

~Tschistowitsch.~ Sur la quantité des leucocytes du sang dans les
pneumonies fibrineuses à issue mortelle. Review: _Centralbl. f. d. Med.
Wissensch._ 1894, no. 39.

~Türk.~ Klinische Untersuchungen über das Verhalten des Blutes bei acuten
Infectionskrankheiten. _Wien u. Leipzig_, 1898.

~Unger.~ Das Colostrum. _Virchow's Archiv_, vol. CLI. 1898.

~Unna.~ Über mucinartige Bestandtheile der Neurofibrome und des
Centralnervensystems. _Monatshefte f. prakt. Dermatologie_, 1894, vol.
XVIII.

~Uskoff~, and the papers of his pupils. See _Archiv des sciences
biologiques_, _St Pétersbourg_.

~Uthemann.~ Zur Lehre von der Leukæmie. _Inaug. Dissert._ _Berlin_, 1888.

~Viault.~ Sur l'augmentation considérable du nombre des globules rouges
dans le sang chez des habitants des hauts-plateaux de l'Amérique du Sud.
_Compt. rend. d. l'Acad. des Sciences_, III.

~Virchow.~ Weisses Blut (Leukæmie). _Virchow's Archiv_, vol. I.

---- Cellular-Pathologie. 4th Ed. _Berlin_, 1871.

~Waldstein.~ Beobachtungen an Leucocyten u. s. w. _Berl. klin. Woch._
1895, no. 17.

~Weiss.~ Hæmatologische Untersuchung. _Wien_, 1896.

---- Über den angeblichen Einfluss des Höhenklimas auf die
Hæmoglobinbildung. _Zeitschr. f. phys. Chem._ 1896-1897, vol. XXII.

~Wendelstadt, H. und Bleibtreu, L.~ Beitrag zur Kenntniss der
quantitativen Zusammensetzung des Menschenblutes unter pathologischen
Verhältnissen. _Zeitschr. f. klin. Med._ 1894, vol. XXV.

---- ---- Bestimmung des Volumens und des Stickstoffgehaltes des
einzelnen roten Blutkörperchens in Pferde- und Schweineblut. _Pflüger's
Archiv_, vol. LII.

~Westphal.~ Über Mastzellen. _Inaug. Dissert._ _Berlin_, 1880. (Cp.
~Ehrlich~, Farbenanalytische Untersuchungen.)

~Winternitz.~ Weitere Untersuchungen über Veränderungen des Blutes unter
thermischen Einwirkungen. _Wiener klin. Woch._ 1893, no. 47.

~Wolff, F. und Koeppe.~ Über Blutuntersuchungen in Reiboldsgrün. _Münch.
med. Woch._ 1893, no. 11.

~Wright.~ Remarks on methods of increasing and diminishing the
coagulability of the blood. _Brit. Med. Journal_, 1894.

~Zangemeister.~ Ein Apparat für colorimetrische Messungen. _Zeitschr. f.
Biologie_, 1896, vol. XXII.

~Zappert, J.~ Über das Vorkommen der eosinophilen Zellen im anæmischen
Blut. _Zeitschr. f. klin. Med._ vol. XXIII. (Literature.)

---- Neuerliche Beobachtungen über das Vorkommen des Ankylostomum
duodenale bei den Bergleuten. _Wiener klin. Woch._ 1892, no. 24.

~Zenoni, C.~ Über das Auftreten kernhaltiger roter Blutkörperchen im
circulierenden Blut. _Virchow's Archiv_, 1895, vol. CXX.

~Zesas, G.~ Beitrag zur Kenntniss der Blutveränderung bei entmilzten
Menschen und Tieren. _Langenbech's Arch._ 1883, vol. XXVIII.

FOOTNOTES:

[37] Owing to the enormous extent of hæmatological literature, we have
been able to refer only to more recent publications. We have, however,
indicated several papers, in which bibliographies of particular parts of
the subject are to be found.




INDEX.


Active leucocytosis, 142

Acute lymphatic leukæmia, 170

---- ---- ---- marrow in, 118

Acute swelling of red corpuscles, 23

Administration of iron, 16

Agony leucocytosis, 146

Alexines, 139

Alkali distribution in blood, 47

---- test for in blood, 46

Anæmia, 1

---- bothriocephalus, 65

---- definition, 2

---- hæmoglobin in, 49

---- iron in blood and organs in, 16

---- isotonic point of corpuscles in, 25

---- leukopenia in, 189

---- pernicious _see_ Pernicious anæmia

---- platelets in, 193

---- posthæmorrhagic, 49, 51

---- ---- erythroblasts in, 51

---- ---- platelets in, 193

---- pseudoleukæmica infantum, 77

---- pulse in, 3

---- retinal vessels in, 3

---- specific gravity of blood in, 18

---- volume of corpuscles in, 23

Anæmic degeneration of corpuscles, 49-52

---- leucocytosis, 146

Arsenurietted hydrogen, leucocytosis from, 145

Asthma

---- eosinophilia in, 150, 158

---- sputum in, 157

---- suppuration in, 160

Atypical leucocytes, 77-80

---- in leukæmia, 179


Basic double staining, 38

Baths, leucocytosis from, 144

Bioblasts, theory of, 128

Birds, eosinophil cells of, 107, 130

Blood, quantity of, 2

---- ---- in anæmias, 3

---- specific gravity of, 17

Blood corpuscles, enumeration of, 5, 6

---- ---- enumeration of in anæmia, 12

Blood corpuscles, estimation of, 12

---- ---- red _see_ Red blood corpuscles

---- ---- volume of, 13

---- ---- white _see_ Leucocytes

---- count, factors in, 11

---- crises, 62

---- dust, 193

---- platelets, 190

---- ---- alkali in, 47

---- ---- in chlorosis, 193

---- ---- origin of, 192

---- poisons, leucocytosis from, 145

Bone-marrow, 105, 112

---- ---- carcinoma of, 178

---- ---- cells of, in various animals, 106

---- ---- changes in anæmia, 117

---- ---- changes in lymphatic leukæmia, 118

---- ---- changes in pernicious anæmia, 117, 129

---- ---- connection with leucocytosis, 155

---- ---- connection with leukopenia, 189

---- ---- development of leucocytes in, 108-110

---- ---- giant cells in, 107

---- ---- of dog, 114

---- ---- protective organ, 111

---- ---- tumours of, 115


Cachectic leucocytosis, 146

Camphor, eosinophilia from administration of, 154

Catarrhal jaundice, volume of corpuscles in, 23

Charcot's crystals, 151

Chemiotaxis, 139

Chemiotaxis, positive, 139

---- negative, 140

Chenzinsky's fluid, 43

Chloroform narcosis, leucocytosis from, 145

Chlorosis, platelets in, 193

Coagulation, rate of, 23

---- connection with platelets, 192, 193

---- in purpura, 193

Coagulometer, 23

Compensatory eosinophilia, 154

Congenital syphilis, leucocytosis in, 147

Corpuscles, at high altitudes, 8

---- enumeration of, 5

---- influences on, 7

---- red _see_ Red corpuscles

---- volume of, 21

---- white _see_ Leucocytes

Crisis, blood, 62

---- in infective fevers, 145


Diabetes, glycogen in blood in, 75

Differential count of corpuscles, 31

---- staining, theory of, 37

Digestion, leucocytosis of, 102

Diphtheria, myelocytes in, 78, 146

Dog, bone-marrow in, 114

Dry preparations, 32

---- substance of blood, 20

Dühring's disease, eosinophilia in, 156


Electricity, resistance to, of corpuscles, 25

Enumeration of corpuscles, 5, 31

---- ---- ---- in anæmia, 12

Eosine-methylene blue methods, 43

Eosinophil cells, 78, 185

Eosinophil cells after splenectomy, 89, 94

---- ---- development of, 109

---- ---- in birds, 130

---- ---- in leukæmia, 176, 177

---- ---- in malignant lymphoma, 163

---- ---- in mammary glands, 163

---- ---- origin of, 160, 161

---- ---- secretion in, 134

---- leucocytosis, 148

---- ---- causes of, 165

---- ---- distinction from leukæmia, 178

---- ---- occurrence, 150-154, 158

---- ---- origin of, 154

---- myelocytes, 78

---- ---- in leukæmia, 174

Erythroblasts, in leukæmia, 180

---- in spleen, 99

---- nuclei of, 57, 61

---- origin of, 55

---- varieties of, 55, 56

Exercise, leucocytosis from, 144


Ferrometer, 16

Fevers, complication of leukæmia, 177, 181

---- leucocytosis in, 144, 146

---- spleen in, 98

Fixation of films, 34

Formalin as fixative, 35


Giant cells in bone-marrow, 107

Gigantoblasts, 56

Glycogen in gonorrhoeal pus, 46

---- in platelets, 192

Glycogen in polynuclear leucocytes, 75

---- stain for, 45

Gonorrhoeal pus, glycogen in, 46

---- ---- mast cells in, 160

Granulation, absence of, 118, 129, 182

---- chemical nature of, 134

---- ripening of, 108

Granules, 121

---- connection with emigration, 132

---- distribution of, 130

---- function of, 127

---- history of, 121-130

---- intravital staining of, 124

---- intravital staining of by neutral red, 125

---- reaction of, 126

---- secretory nature of, 134

---- specificity of, 133

---- survival staining of, 125

Guinea-pig, leucocytes in, 85, 112


Hæmatocrit, 21

Hæmatocytometer, 4

Hæmatoxylin-eosine mixture, 42

Hæmoconiæ, 193

Hæmoglobin, amount of, 13

---- connection with specific gravity, 18

---- equivalent in anæmias, 49

---- estimation of, 14-17

Hæmoglobinometer, 15

Hæmorrhages, acute, 51

Hæmorrhagic small-pox, pseudo-lymphocytes in, 79

Hayem's solution, 5

Heat as fixative agent, 34

Hedgehog, splenectomy in, 107

Helminthiasis, eosinophilia in, 150

High altitudes, erythrocytes at, 8-12

---- ---- poikilocytosis at, 9

Hodgkin's disease (malignant lymphoma), 101, 102

---- ---- eosinophil cells in, 165

Hyaline cells _see_ Large mononuclear leucocytes

Hygræmometry, 20


Infectious diseases, leucocytosis in, 146, 147

---- ---- myelocytes in, 77

---- ---- splenic enlargement in, 99

Intestinal diseases, leucocytosis in, 102

Intravital staining, 124

Iron, administration of, 16

---- connection of, with hæmoglobin, 16-18

---- in blood, 16

---- in eosinophil cells, 134

Isotonic point of corpuscles, 25


Jenner's stain, 44


Kresyl-violet-R, metachromatism with, 76

Kurloff's researches, 85


Lactation, eosinophil cells in, 163

---- mast cells in, 163

Large mononuclear leucocytes, 73, 112, 185
 ---- mononuclear leucocytes in measles, 113

Leucocytes, 71

Leucocytes, atypical forms, 77, 179

---- enumeration of, 5

---- in birds, 131

---- in guinea-pig, 85-87, 112

---- places of origin, 81

Leucocytosis, 138

---- active, 142

---- agony, 146

---- cachectic, 146

---- chemically produced, 189

---- classification of, 142

---- diagnostic importance of, 146

---- eosinophil _see_ Eosinophil leucocytosis

---- function of bone-marrow, 110

---- in anæmia, 146;
  congenital syphilis, 147;
  measles, 113, 145, 189;
  parotitis, 144;
  pneumonia, 144, 174;
  rheumatism, 144;
  tumours of bone-marrow, 116;
  typhoid, 146, 189

---- mixed, 143, 167

---- of digestion, 102

---- origin of, 146

---- passive, 142

---- physiological, 144

---- polynuclear neutrophil, 143

---- theories of, 138

Leukæmia, acute lymphatic, 118, 170;
  chronic, 170;
  suppuration in, 105

---- myelogenic, 169

---- ---- atypical cases, 182

Leukæmia, myelogenic, atypical leucocytes in, 179

---- ---- characteristics of, 174-181

---- ---- complicated with other diseases, 174, 181

---- ---- contrasted with eosinophilia, 178

---- ---- contrasted with pneumonia, 174

---- ---- diagnosis from blood, 171

---- ---- eosinophilia in, 176

---- ---- mast cells in, 179

---- ---- mitoses in, 180

---- ---- mononuclear eosinophils in, 175

---- ---- myelocytes in, 174

---- ---- origin of blood condition, 183, 187

---- ---- pleuritic exudation in, 186

---- ---- polynuclear myelocytes in, 175

Leukopenia, 188-190

---- experimental, 140

---- in various diseases, 189

Liver, granules in, 127

Lymphæmia _see_ Lymphocytosis

Lymphatic glands, 100

---- ---- myelocytes in, 110

Lymphocytes, 71

---- in disease of lymphatic glands, 101;
  lymphatic tumours, 101;
  polynuclear leucocytosis, 143

Lymphocytosis, 101, 103, 144

---- after splenectomy, 90, 94

---- causes of, 101-103

---- in leukæmia, 170

---- origin of, 104

Lymphoma malignum (Hodgkin's disease), 101, 102


Malignant tumours, eosinophilia from, 153

Mast cells, 76, 160

---- ---- halo round, 135

---- ---- in gonorrhoea, 162;
  leukæmia, 179;
  purpura (horse), 136

---- ---- in skin, 160

---- ---- origin of, 162

---- ---- secretion in, 135

Measles, leukopenia in, 145, 189

Medicinal eosinophilia, 154

Megaloblasts, 56-62

---- in bothriocephalus anæmia, 65;
  leukæmia, 180;
  pernicious anæmia, 62, 66;
  tumours of bone-marrow, 117

Megalocytes, 64

Metachromatism in mast cells, 76

Methylal method, 44

Microblasts, 57

Mitoses in leukæmic blood, 180

Mononuclear leucocytes, 73, 112, 116

---- ---- origin of, 113

---- ---- power of motion, 185

Mouse, polynuclear cells in, 131

---- spleen in, 99

Myelæmia, origin of, 183, 187

Myelocytes, 77, 110

---- importance in blood, 110;
  in diphtheria, 78


---- in anæmia pseudoleukæmica infantum, 77;
  bone-marrow tumours, 117;
  leukæmia, 174;
  lymphatic glands, 110;
  lymphatic leukæmia, 118;
  pneumonia, 78

Myelocytes, eosinophil, 78, 175

Myelogenic leukæmia _see_ Leukæmia, myelogenic


Nasal polypi, eosinophil cells in, 159

Neutral red, 125

Neutrophil granulation, absence of, 118, 129

Neutrophil leucocytes _see_ Polynuclear neutrophil leucocytes

Neutrophil pseudolymphocytes, 79

Normoblasts, 56, 57-62

---- in anæmias, 62;
  leukæmia, 180

Nose, diseases of, eosinophil cells in, 159

Nucleated red corpuscles _see_ Erythroblasts


Old granulations, 109

Oligæmia, 2

Oligochromæmia, 2

Oligocythæmia, 2

Ozonophores, 129


Pacini's solution, 5

Paralysis, unilateral, corpuscles in, 6

Parotitis, leucocytosis in, 144

Passive leucocytosis, 142

Pemphigus bullæ, 156

---- ---- eosinophilia in, 150

Pernicious anæmia, bone-marrow in, 129

Pernicious anæmia, hæmoglobin equivalent in, 49

---- ---- megaloblasts in, 63, 65

---- ---- prognosis, 66

Phagocytosis, 139

Phosphorus poisoning, spleen in, 98

Pilocarpine, lymphocytosis from, 103

Platelets _see_ Blood platelets

Pleuritic exudations, in leukæmia, 186

---- ---- pseudo-lymphocytes in, 79

Pneumonia, contrast with leukæmia, 174

---- glycogen reaction in, 75

---- leucocytosis in, 141, 146, 152

---- myelocytes in, 174

Poikilocytosis, 52

---- at high altitudes, 9

---- explanation of, 54

---- from heating, 54

Polychromatophil degeneration, 49

Polynuclear neutrophil leucocytes, 74, 112, 185

---- ---- ---- diminution of in lymphatic leukæmia, 118;
  in myelogenic leukæmia, 182

---- ---- ---- increase of _see_ Leucocytosis

---- ---- ---- movement in, 184

---- ---- ---- secretion in, 137

Post-febrile eosinophilia, 152

Posthæmorrhagic anæmia, blood in, 51

---- ---- ---- platelets in, 193

Potassium chlorate, leucocytosis from, 155

Pregnancy, leucocytosis in, 144

Pseudo-eosinophil cells, 85, 133

---- ---- ---- secretion in, 137

Pseudo-lymphocytes, 79

Purpura, of horse, mast cells in, 136

---- platelets in, 193

Pyknosis, 61

Pyrodin, leucocytosis from, 145


Quadratic ocular diaphragm, 31

Quantity of blood, estimation of, 2


Red corpuscles, 48

---- ---- acute swelling of, 21

---- ---- at high altitudes, 8-12

---- ---- connection with spleen, 99

---- ---- in anæmia, 49-57

---- ---- isotonic point of, 25

---- ---- nucleated _see_ Erythroblasts

---- ---- number of, in health, 7

---- ---- number of differences in age, 7;
  in sex, 7;
  food, 7;
  from vasomotor influences, 11

---- ---- polychromatophil degeneration in, 49

---- ---- size of, 12

---- ---- volume of, 21

Retinal vessels in anæmia, 3

Rheumatic fever, leucocytosis in, 152


Scarlet fever, leucocytosis in, 146

---- ---- lymphatic glands in, 110

Separation of serum, 24

Serum, specific gravity of, 20

Sex, influence on red corpuscles, 7

---- ---- specific gravity of blood, 17

Shock, effect of, on specific gravity of blood, 18

Size of red corpuscles, 12

Skin diseases, eosinophilia in, 150

Small-celled infiltration, 105

Specific gravity of blood, 17

---- ---- ---- ---- connection with hæmoglobin, 18

---- ---- ---- ---- in anæmias, 18

---- ---- ---- ---- influences acting on, 18

---- ---- ---- ---- of serum, 20

Spleen, 84

---- as blood forming organ, 84, 99

---- enlargement of, in fevers and phosphorus poisoning, 98

---- excision of _see_ Splenectomy

---- functions of, 98

---- in guinea-pig, 91, 93, 99

---- tumours of, 97, 98

Splenectomy, effect of on blood in hedgehog, 107;
  in guinea-pig, 88;
  in man, 93, 95, 96, 113

Staining, theory of, 36

---- vital, 124

Stimulation forms of leucocytes, 79

Stroma of corpuscles, influence on specific gravity of blood, 19

Suppuration in lymphatic leukæmia, 104;
  in myelogenic, 177;
  in pemphigus, 157

Survival staining, 125


Thyroid, changes after splenectomy, 84

Time of life, influence of, on corpuscles, 7

Toxic leucocytosis, 145

Transitional forms of leucocytes, 74, 112

Triacid stain, 42, 131

Trichinosis, eosinophilia in, 152

Tropics, influence of, on red corpuscles, 12

Tuberculin injections, eosinophilia from, 152

---- ---- lymphocytosis in, 103

Tumours of bone-marrow, 115

Typhoid fever, leukopenia in, 146, 189


Urticaria, eosinophilia in, 150


Vital staining, 124

Volume of corpuscles, 21


White blood corpuscles _see_ Leucocytes

Whooping cough, lymphocytosis in, 103

Worms _see_ Helminthiasis

Wright's coagulometer, 24


CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY J. AND C. F. CLAY, AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Histology of the Blood, by 
Paul Ehrlich and Adolf Lazarus

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTOLOGY OF THE BLOOD ***

***** This file should be named 29842-8.txt or 29842-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/8/4/29842/

Produced by Bryan Ness, Josephine Paolucci and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
